The following is a conversation with Sam Harris, his second time in the podcast. As I said two
years ago, when I first met and spoke with Sam, he's one of the most influential pioneering thinkers
of our time. As the host of the Making Sense podcast, creator of the Waking Up app, and the
author of many seminal books on human nature and the human mind, including The End of Faith,
The More Landscape, Lying, Free Will, and Waking Up. In this conversation, besides our mutual
fascination with AGI and Free Will, we do also go deep into controversial, challenging topics
of Donald Trump, Hunter Biden, January 6th, Vaccines, Lab Leak, Kanye West, and several
key figures at the Center of Public Discourse, including Joe Rogan and Elon Musk, both of whom
have been friends of Sam and have become friends of mine. Somehow, an amazing life trajectory
that I do not deserve in any way and, in fact, believe is probably a figment of my imagination.
And if it's alright, please allow me to say a few words about this personal aspect of the
conversation of discussing Joe, Elon, and others. What's been weighing heavy on my heart since
the beginning of the pandemic, now three years ago, is that many people I look to for wisdom
in public discourse stop talking to each other as often, with respect, humility, and love,
when the world needed those kinds of conversations the most. My hope is that they start talking again,
they start being friends again, they start noticing the humanity that connects them,
that is much deeper than the disagreements that divide them. So let me take this moment to say,
with humility and honesty, why I look up to and am inspired by Joe, Elon, and Sam.
I think Joe Rogan is important to the world, as a voice of compassion and curiosity, and open
mindedness to ideas both radical and mainstream, sometimes with humor, sometimes with brutal
honesty, always pushing for more kindness in the world. I think Elon Musk is important to the world
as an engineer, leader, entrepreneur, and human being who takes on the hardest problems that
face humanity and refuses to accept the constraints of conventional thinking that made the solutions
to these problems seem impossible. I think Sam Harris is important to the world as a fearless
voice who fights for the pursuit of truth against growing forces of echo chambers and audience capture,
taking unpopular perspectives and defending them with rigor and resilience. I both celebrate
and criticize all three privately, and they criticize me, usually more effectively,
from which I always learn a lot and always appreciate. Most importantly, there is respect
and love for each other as human beings, the very thing that I think the world needs most now,
in a time of division and chaos. I will continue to try to mend divisions, to try to understand,
not to ride, to turn the other cheek if needed, to return hate with love. Sometimes people criticize
me for being naive, cheesy, simplistic, all of that. I know, I agree, but I really am speaking
from the heart, and I'm trying. This world is too fucking beautiful not to try, in whatever way I know
how. I love you all. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our
sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Sam Harris.
I would argue, even a species of reason, it's just understanding another person's point of view.
You understand why they're suffering or why they're happy, or you have a theory of mind
about another human being that is accurate, and so you can navigate in relationship to them
more effectively. And then there's another layer entirely, not incompatible with that,
but just distinct, which is what people often mean by empathy, which is more a kind of emotional
contagion. You feel depressed, and I begin to feel depressed along with you because it's just
it's contagious. We're so close, and I'm so concerned about you, and your problems become
my problems, and it bleeds through right now. I think both of those capacities are very important,
but the emotional contagion piece, and this is not really my thesis, this is something I have
more or less learned from Paul Bloom, the psychologist who wrote a book on this topic titled
Against Empathy. The emotional social contagion piece is a bad guide, rather often for ethical
behavior and ethical intuitions. So I'll give you the clear example of this, which is
we find stories with a single identifiable protagonist who we can effortlessly empathize with
far more compelling than data. So if I tell you, this is the classic case of the little girl who
falls down a well, right? This is somebody's daughter, you see the parents distraught on
television, you hear her cries from the bottom of the well, the whole country stops. I mean,
this was an example of this 20, 25 years ago, I think, where it was just wall-to-wall on CNN.
This is just the perfect use of CNN. It was 72 hours or whatever it was of continuous coverage
just extracting this girl from a well. So we effortlessly pay attention to that,
we care about it, we will donate money toward it. I mean, it's just, it marshals 100% of our
compassion and altruistic impulse. Whereas if you hear that there's a genocide raging in some
country you've never been to and never attended to go to, and the numbers don't make a dent,
and we find the story boring, right? And we'll change the channel in the face of a genocide,
right? It doesn't matter. And it literally, perversely, it could be 500,000 little girls
have fallen down wells in that country, and we still don't care, right? So it's,
you know, many of us have come to believe that this is a bug rather than a feature of our
moral psychology. And so empathy plays an unhelpful role there. So ultimately, I think
when we're making big decisions about what we should do and how to mitigate human suffering and
what's worth valuing and how we should protect those values, I think reason is the better tool.
But it's not that I would want to dispense with any part of empathy either.
Well, there's a lot of danger to go on there. But briefly to mention, you've recently talked about
effective altruism on your podcast. I think you mentioned some interesting statement. I'm going
to horribly misquote you, but that you'd rather live in a world like it doesn't really make sense,
but you'd rather live in a world where you care about maybe your daughter and son
more than 100 people that live across the world, something like this. Where the calculus is not
always perfect, but somehow it makes sense to live in a world where it's irrational in this way.
And yet empathetic in the way you've been discussing.
Right. I'm not sure what the right answer is there, or even whether there is one right answer.
There could be multiple peaks on this part of the moral landscape. But so the opposition is
between an ethic that's articulated by someone like the Dalai Lama or really any exponent of
classic Buddhism would say that the ultimate enlightened ethic is true dispassion with respect
to friends and strangers. The mind of the Buddha would be truly dispassionate. You would love
and care about all people equally. And by that light, it seems some kind of ethical failing,
or at least a failure to fully actualize compassion in the limit, or enlightened wisdom in the limit,
to care more or even much more about your kids than the kids of other people, and to prioritize
your energy in that way. So you spend all this time trying to figure out how to keep your kids
healthy and happy, and you'll attend to their minutest concerns and however superficial.
Again, there's a genocide raging in Sudan or wherever, and it takes up less than 1% of your
bandwidth. I'm not sure it would be a better world if everyone was running the Dalai Lama program
there. I think some prioritization of one's nearest and dearest ethically might be optimal
because we'll all be doing that, and we'll all be doing that in a circumstance where
we have certain norms and laws and other structures that force us to be dispassionate
where that matters. When my daughter gets sick, and I have to take her to a hospital,
I really want her to get attention, and I'm worried about her more than I'm worried about
everyone else in the lobby. But the truth is, I actually don't want a totally corrupt hospital.
I don't want a hospital that treats my daughter better than anyone else in the lobby because
she's my daughter, and I've bribed the guy at the door, or the guy's a fan of my podcast,
or whatever the thing is. You don't want starkly corrupt, unfair situations,
and when you get pressed down the hierarchy of Maslow's needs individually and
societally, a bunch of those variables change, and they change for the worse,
understandably. But yeah, when everyone's corrupt and you're in a state of
collective emergency, you've got a lifeboat problem, you're scrambling to get into the
lifeboat, yeah, then fairness and norms and the other vestiges of civilization
begin to get stripped off. We can't reason from those emergencies to normal life. I mean,
in normal life, we want justice, we want fairness, we're all better off for it, even when
the spotlight of our concern is focused on the people we know, the people who are friends,
the people who are family, people we have good reason to care about. We still, by default,
want a system that protects the interests of strangers too, and we know that generally speaking,
and just in game theoretic terms, we're all going to tend to be better off in a fair system
than a corrupt one. One of the failure modes of empathy is our susceptibility to anecdotal data,
just a good story will get us to not think clearly. But what about empathy in the context of just
discussing ideas with other people? And then there's a large number of people like in this country,
you know, red and blue, half the population believes certain things on immigration or on
the response to the pandemic or any kind of controversial issue, even if the election was
fairly executed. Having an empathy for their worldview, trying to understand where they're
coming from, not just in the explicit statement of their idea, but the entirety of the roots
from which their ideas stems, that kind of empathy while you're discussing ideas, what is
in your pursuit of truth, having empathy for the perspective of a large number of other people
versus raw mathematical reason. I think it's important, but it only takes you so far. It
doesn't get you to truth, right? Truth is not decided by democratic principles. And
certain people believe things for understandable reasons, but those reasons are nonetheless
bad reasons, right? They don't scale, they don't generalize. They're not reasons anyone
should adopt for themselves or respect epistemologically. And yet their circumstance
is understandable and it's something you can care about, right? I think there's many examples
of this you might be thinking of, but one that comes to mind is I've been super critical of
Trump, obviously, and I've been super critical of certain people for endorsing him or not
criticizing him when he really made it patently obvious who he was, you know, if there had been
any doubt initially, there was no doubt when we have a sitting president who's not agreeing
to a peaceful transfer of power, right? So I'm critical of all of that, and yet the fact that
many millions of Americans didn't see what was wrong with Trump or bought into the,
didn't see through his con, right? I mean, they bought into the idea that he was a brilliant
businessman who might just be able to change things because he's so unconventional and so,
you know, his heart is in the right place, you know, he's really a man of the people,
even though he's a, you know, gold-plated everything in his life. They bought the myth
somehow of, you know, largely because they had seen him on television for almost a decade and a
half pretending to be this genius businessman who could get things done. It's understandable to
me that many very frustrated people who have not had their hopes and dreams actualized,
who have been the victims of globalism and many other, you know, current trends,
it's understandable that they would be confused and not see the liability of electing a grossly
incompetent, morbidly narcissistic person into the presidency. So I don't, so which is to say
that I don't blame, there are many, many millions of people who I don't necessarily blame for the
Trump phenomenon, but I can nonetheless bemoan the phenomenon as indicative of, you know, very bad
state of affairs in our society, right? So it's two levels to it. I mean, one is,
I think you have to call a spade a spade when you're talking about how things actually work and what
things are likely to happen or not, but then you can recognize that people have very different life
experiences. And yeah, I mean, I think empathy and, you know, probably the better word for what I
would hope to embody there is compassion, right? Like really, you know,
to really wish people well, you know, and to really wish, you know, strangers well,
effortlessly wish them well. I mean, to realize that there is no opposition between,
at bottom, there's no real opposition between selfishness and selflessness because
wise selfishness really takes into account other people's happiness. I mean, you know,
which do you want to live in a society where you have everything, but most other people have nothing?
Or do you want to live in a society where you're surrounded by happy, creative,
self-actualized people who are having their hopes and dreams realized? I think it's
obvious that the second society is much better, however much you can guard your good luck.
But what about having empathy for certain principles that people believe? For example,
the pushback, the other perspective on this, because you said bought the myth of Trump as
the great businessman. There could be a lot of people that are supporters of Trump who could say
that Sam Harris bought the myth that we have this government of the people by the people that
actually represents the people as opposed to a bunch of elites who are running a giant bureaucracy
that is corrupt, that is feeding themselves, and they're actually not representing the people.
And then here's this chaos agent, Trump, who speaks off the top of his head. Yeah, he's flawed in
all this number of ways. He's a more comedian than he is a presidential type of figure. And
he's actually creating the kind of chaos that's going to shake up this bureaucracy,
shake up the elites that are so uncomfortable because they don't want the world to know about
the game that got running on everybody else. So that's the kind of perspective that they would
take and say, yeah, there's these flaws that Trump has, but this is necessary.
I agree with the first part. So I haven't bought the myth that it's a truly representative democracy
in the way that we might idealize. On some level, I mean, this is a different conversation,
but on some level, I'm not even sure how much I think it should be. I'm not sure
we want, in the end, everyone's opinion given equal weight about just what we should do about
anything. And I include myself in that. I mean, there are many topics around which
I don't deserve to have a strong opinion because I don't know what I'm talking about or what I
would be talking about if I had a strong opinion. And I think we'll probably get to that,
to some of those topics because I've declined to have certain conversations on my podcast just
because I think I'm the wrong person to have that conversation. And I think it's important to see
those bright lines in one's life and in the moment politically and ethically. So yeah, I think
so leave aside the viability of democracy, I'm under no illusions that all of our institutions
are worth preserving precisely as they have been up until the moment. This great orange
wrecking ball came swinging through our lives. But it was a very bad bet to elect someone who is
grossly incompetent. And worse than incompetent, genuinely malevolent in his selfishness.
And this is something we know based on literally decades of him being in the public eye. He's
not a public servant in any normal sense of that term. And he couldn't possibly give an honest
or sane answer to the question you asked me about empathy and reason and what should guide us.
I genuinely think he is missing some necessary moral and psychological tools. I can feel
compassion for him as a human being because I think having those things is incredibly important.
And genuinely loving other people is incredibly important. And knowing what all that's about
is really the good stuff in life. And I think he's missing a lot of that. But I think we don't
want to promote people to the highest positions of power in our society who are far outliers in
pathological terms. We want them to be far outliers in the best case, in wisdom and compassion
and some of the topics you've brought up. I mean, we want someone to be deeply informed. We want
someone to be unusually curious, unusually alert to how they may be wrong or getting things wrong
consequentially. He's none of those things. And so far as we're going to get normal mediocrities
in that role, which I think is often the best we could expect, let's get normal mediocrities
in that role, not once in a generation narcissists and frauds. I mean, it's like
we just take honesty as a single variable. I think you want, yes, it's possible that
most politicians lie at least some of the time. I don't think that's a good thing.
I think people should be generally honest, even to a fault. Yes, there are certain circumstances
where lying I think is necessary. It's kind of on a continuum of self-defense and violence.
So it's like if Nazis come to your door and ask you if you've got Anne Frank in the attic,
I think it's okay to lie to them. But I arguably there's never been a person that anyone could
name in human history who's lied with that kind of velocity. I mean, it's just, it was just a
blizzard of lies, great and small, pointless and effective. But it says something
fairly alarming about our society that a person of that character got promoted. And so, yes,
I have compassion and concern for half of the society who didn't see it that way,
and that's going to sound elitist and smug or something for anyone who's on that side
listening to me. But it's genuine. I understand that I barely have the, I'm one of the luckiest
people in the world, and I barely have the bandwidth to pay attention to half the things
I should pay attention to in order to have an opinion about half the things we're going to
talk about. So how much less bandwidth does somebody who's working two jobs or a single mom
who's raising multiple kids, even a single kid, it's just unimaginable to me that people have
the bandwidth to really track this stuff. And so then they jump on social media and they see,
they get inundated by misinformation and they see what their favorite influencer just said.
And now they're worried about vaccines and it's just, we're living in an environment where the
information space becomes so corrupted and we've built machines to further corrupt it.
We've built a business model for the internet that further corrupts it. So it's chaos in
informational terms, and I don't fault people for being confused and impatient at their wit's end.
And yes, Trump was an enormous fuck you to the establishment. And that was understandable
for many reasons. To me, Sam Harris, the great Sam Harris, is somebody I've looked up to for a
long time as a beacon of voice of reason. And there's this meme on the internet, and I would
love you to steal me on the case for it and against that Trump broke Sam Harris' brain.
That there is something is disproportionately to the actual impact that Trump had on our society.
He had an impact on the ability of balanced, calm, rational minds to see the world clearly,
to think clearly. You being one of the beacons of that. Is there a degree to which he broke your
brain? Otherwise known as Trump derangement syndrome, medical condition.
Yeah, I think Trump derangement syndrome is a very clever meme because it just
throws the problem back on the person who's criticizing Trump. But in truth, the true
Trump derangement syndrome was not to have seen how dangerous and divisive it would be to promote
someone like Trump to that position of power. And in the final moment, not to see how untenable it
was to still support someone sitting president who was not committing to a peaceful transfer
of power. If that wasn't a bright line for you, you have been deranged by something.
Because that was one minute to midnight for our democracy as far as I'm concerned. And I think
it really was but for the integrity of a few people that we didn't suffer some real constitutional
crisis and real emergency after January 6th. I mean, if Mike Pence had caved in
and decided to not certify the election, literally you can count on two hands,
a number of people who held things together at that moment. And so it wasn't for want of
trying on Trump's part that we didn't succumb to some truly uncharted catastrophe with our
democracy. So the fact that that didn't happen is not a sign that those of us who were worried that
it was so close to happening were exaggerating the problem. I mean, it's like you almost got
run over by a car, but you didn't. And so the fact that you're adrenalized and you're thinking,
oh boy, that was dangerous, I probably shouldn't wander in the middle of the street
with my eyes closed, you weren't wrong to feel that you really had a problem.
And came very close to something truly terrible. So I think that's where we were,
and I think we shouldn't do that again. So the fact that he's still, he's coming back around
as potentially a viable candidate, I'm not spending much time thinking about it, frankly,
because I'm waiting for the moment where it requires some thought. I mean, it took up,
I don't know how many podcasts I devoted to the topic. It wasn't that many in the end against
the number of podcasts I devoted to other topics, but there are people who look at Trump and just
find him funny, entertaining, not especially threatening. It's just good fun to see somebody
who's just not taking anything seriously, and it's just putting a stick in the wheel of business
as usual again and again and again and again. And they don't really see anything much at stake.
It doesn't really matter if we don't support NATO. It doesn't really matter if he says he trusts
Putin more than our intelligence services. It doesn't matter if he's on the one hand
saying that he loves the leader of North Korea and on the other, threatening to bomb them back
to the Stone Age on Twitter. It all can be taken in the spirit of reality television. This is
the part of the movie that's just fun to watch. And I understand that. I can even inhabit that
space for a few minutes at a time, but there's a deeper concern that we're in the process of
entertaining ourselves to death, that we're just not taking things seriously. And this is a problem
I've had with several other people we might name who just appear to me to be goofing around at scale,
and they lack a kind of moral seriousness. I mean, they're touching big problems
where lives hang in the balance, but they're just fucking around. And I think there are really
important problems that we have to get our heads straight around. And it's not to say that
institutions don't become corrupt. I think they do. And I'm quite worried that both about the
loss of trust in our institutions and the fact that trust has eroded for good reason,
right? That they have become less trustworthy. They've become infected by political ideologies
that are not truth tracking. I mean, I worry about all of that. But I just think we need
institutions. We need to rebuild them. We need experts who are real experts. We need to value
expertise over amateurish speculation and conspiracy thinking and bullshit.
The kind of amateur speculation we're doing on this very podcast?
I'm usually alert to the moments where I'm just guessing or where I actually
feel like I'm talking from within my wheelhouse. And I try to telegraph that a fair amount with
people. But it's different. I mean, you can invite someone onto your podcast who's an expert
about something that you're not an expert about. And then you, in the process of getting
more informed yourself, your audience is getting more informed. So you're asking smart questions,
and you might be pushing back at the margins. But you know that when push comes to shove,
on that topic, you really don't have a basis to have a strong opinion. And if you were going to
form a strong opinion that was this counter to the expert you have in front of you,
it's going to be by deference to some other expert who you've brought in or who you've
heard about or whose work you've read or whatever. But there's a paradox to
how we value authority in science that most people don't understand. And I think we should,
at some point, unravel that because it's the basis for a lot of public confusion. And frankly,
it's the basis for a lot of criticism I've received on these topics where people think that
I'm against free speech or I'm an establishment shill or it's like I'm a credentialist,
I just think people with PhDs from Ivy League universities should run everything.
It's not true, but there's a lot to cut through to get to daylight there because people are
very confused about how we value authority in the service of rationality generally.
You've talked about it, but it's just interesting the intensity of feeling you have.
You've had this famous phrase about Hunter Biden and children in the basement.
Can you just revisit this case? So let me give another perspective on the situation of January
6th and Trump in general. It's possible that January 6th and things of that nature revealed
that our democracy is actually pretty fragile. And then Trump is not a malevolent and ultra
competent malevolent figure, but is simply a jokester. And he just by creating the chaos revealed
that it's all pretty fragile because you're a student in history and there's a lot of people
like Vladimir Lenin, Hitler, who are exceptionally competent at controlling power, at being executives
and taking that power, controlling the generals, controlling all the figures involved and certainly
not tweeting but working in the shadows behind the scenes to gain power. And they did so extremely
competently and that is how they were able to gain power. The pushback with Trump is he was doing
none of that. He's very good at creating drama, sometimes for humor's sake, sometimes for drama's
sake and simply revealed that our democracy is fragile. And so he's not this once in a generation
horrible figure. Once in a generation narcissist. I don't think he's a truly scary sinister Putin-like
or much less Hitler-like figure, not at all. I mean, he's not ideological. He doesn't care
about anything beyond himself. So it's not... No, no, he's much less scary than any really scary
totalitarian. And he's... He's more brave in your world than 1984.
This is what Eric Weinstein never stops badgering me about, but he's still wrong, Eric.
My analogy for Trump was that he's an evil Chauncey Gardner. I don't know if you remember
the book or the film Being There with Peter Sellers. But Peter Sellers is this Gardner who
really doesn't know anything, but he gets recognized as this wise man and he gets promoted to immense
power in Washington because he's speaking in a semblance of wisdom. He's got these very simple
aphorisms or it would seem to be aphorisms. All he cares about is gardening. He's just talking
about his garden all the time. But he'll say something, but in the spring, the new shoots
will bloom and people read into that some kind of genius insight politically. And so he gets
promoted and says that's the joke of the film. For me, Trump has always been someone like an
evil Chauncey Gardner. It's not to say he's totally... Yes, he has a certain kind of genius.
He's got a genius for creating a spectacle around himself. He's got a genius for getting the eye of
the media always coming back to him. But it's a kind of self-promotion that only works if you
actually are truly shameless and don't care about having a reputation for anything that I or you
would want to have a reputation for. It's like the pure pornography of attention. And he just
wants more of it. I think the truly depressing and genuinely scary thing was that we have a
country that at least half of the country, given how broken our society is in many ways,
we have a country that didn't see anything wrong with that, bringing someone who obviously
doesn't know what he should know to be president and who's obviously not a good person, who obviously
doesn't care about people, can't even pretend to care about people really, in a credible way.
And so if there's a silver lining to this, it's along the lines you just sketched,
it shows us how vulnerable our system is to a truly brilliant and sinister figure. I think
we really dodged a bullet. Someone far more competent and conniving and ideological could have
exploited our system in a way that Trump didn't. So if we plug those holes eventually,
that would be a good thing and he would have done a good thing for our society.
One of the things we realized, and I think nobody knew, I certainly didn't know it and I
didn't hear anyone talk about it, is how much our system relies on norms rather than laws.
Yeah, civility almost.
Yeah, it's quite possible that he never did anything illegal, truly illegal. I think he
probably did a few illegal things, but illegal such that he really should be thrown in jail for it.
At least that remains to be seen. So all of the chaos, all of the
diminishment of our stature in the world, all of the just the opportunity costs of
spending years focused on nonsense, all of that was just norm violations. All that was just all
a matter of not saying the thing you should say, but that doesn't mean they're insignificant, right?
It's not that it's like, it's not illegal for a sitting president to say,
no, I'm not going to commit to a peaceful transfer of power, right? We'll wait and see
whether I win. If I win, the election was valid. If I lose, it was fraudulent, right?
But aren't those humorous perturbations to our system of civility such that we know where the
limits are and now we start to think that and have these kinds of discussions?
That wasn't a humorous perturbation because he did everything he could, granted he wasn't very
competent, but he did everything he could to try to steal the election. I mean, the irony is he
claimed to have an election stolen from him all the while doing everything he could to steal it,
declaring it fraudulent in advance, trying to get the votes to not be counted as the evening
war on, knowing that they were going to be disproportionately Democrat votes
because of the position he took on mail-in ballots. I mean, all of it was fairly calculated,
the whole circus of the clown car that crashed into four seasons landscaping, right? And you got
Rudy Giuliani with his hair dye, and you got Sidney Powell and all these grossly incompetent
people lying as freely as they could breathe about election fraud, right? And all of these
things are getting thrown out by largely Republican election officials and Republican judges.
It wasn't for want of trying that he didn't maintain his power in this country. He really
tried to steal the presidency. He just was not competent, and the people around him weren't
competent. So that's a good thing, and it's worth not letting that happen again.
But he wasn't competent so he didn't do everything he could.
Well, no, he did everything he could. He didn't do everything that could have been
done by someone more competent. Right. But the tools you have as a president,
you could do a lot of things. You can declare emergencies, especially during COVID,
you could postpone the election, you can create military conflict that, you know,
any kind of reason to postpone the election, there's a lot of...
Well, he tried to do things, and he would have to have done those things through other people,
and there are people who refuse to do those things. There are people who said they would
quit. They would quit publicly. Again, there are multiple books written about
the last hours of this presidency, and the details are shocking in what he tried to do
and tried to get others to do, and it's awful, right? I mean, it's just awful that we were that
close to something, to a true unraveling of our political process. I mean, it's the only time
in our lifetime that anything like this has happened, and it's deeply embarrassing, right?
On the world stage, it's just like we looked like a banana republic there for a while,
and we're the lone superpower. It's not good, and so we shouldn't... There's no...
The people who thought, well, we just need to shake things up, and this is a great way to
shake things up, and having people storm our capital and smear shit on the walls,
that's just more shaking things up, right? It's all just for the lulls.
There's a nihilism and cynicism to all of that, which, again, in certain people, it's
understandable. Frankly, it's not understandable if you've got a billion dollars and you have a
compound in Menlo Park or wherever. There are people who are cheerleading this stuff,
who shouldn't be cheerleading this stuff, and who know that they can get on their
Gulf Stream and fly to their compound in New Zealand if everything goes to shit, right?
There's a cynicism to all of that that I think we should be deeply critical of.
What I'm trying to understand is not the behavior of this particular human being,
but the effect it had in part on the division between people. To me, the degree, the meme
of Sam Harris's brain being broken by Trump represents...
You're like the person I would look to to bridge the division.
Well, I don't think there is something profitably to be said to someone who's truly
captivated by the personality cult of Trumpism, right? There's nothing that I'm going to say to...
There's no conversation I'm going to have with Candace Owens, say, about Trump
that's going to converge on something reasonable, right?
You don't think so?
No. I haven't tried with Candace, but I've tried with many people who
are in that particular orbit. I mean, I've had conversations with people who
won't admit that there's anything wrong with Trump, anything.
So I'd like to push for the empathy versus reason, because when you operate in the
space of reason, yes. But I think there's a lot of power in you showing, in you, Sam Harris,
showing that you're willing to see the good qualities of Trump, publicly showing that.
I think that's the way to win over the Candace Owens.
But he has so few of them. He has fewer good qualities than virtually anyone I can name,
right? So he's funny. I'll grant you that he's funny. He's a good entertainer.
Does others look at just policies and actual impacts he had?
I've admitted that. No, no. So I've admitted that many of his policies I agree with,
many, many of his policies. So probably more often than not, at least on balance, I agree.
I agreed with his policy that we should take China seriously as an adversary, right?
And I think, I mean, again, there's a lot of fine print to a lot of this, because
the way he talks about these things and many of his motives that are obvious are things that I
don't support, but we take immigration. I think it's obvious that we should have control of our
borders. I don't see the argument for not having control of our borders. We should let in who we
want to let in, and we should keep out who we want to keep out, and we should have a sane
immigration policy. So I didn't necessarily think it was a priority to build the wall,
but I never criticized the impulse to build the wall, because if tens of thousands, hundreds
of thousands of people are coming across that border and we are not in a position to know who's
coming, that seems untenable to me. And I can recognize that many people in our society
are on balance the victims of immigration. And there is, in many cases, a zero-sum contest
between the interests of actual citizens and the interests of immigrants, right? So I think we
should have control of our borders. We should have a sane and compassionate immigration policy.
We should let in refugees, right? So Trump on refugees was terrible. But I would say 80% of
the policy concerns people celebrated in him are concerns that I either share entirely or
certainly sympathize with, right? So that's not the issue. The issue is...
A threat to democracy in some fundamental way.
The issue is largely what you said it was. It's not so much the person, it's the effect on
everything he touches, right? He has this superpower of deranging and destabilizing
almost everything he touches and sullying and compromising the integrity of almost anyone who
comes into his orbit. I mean, so you looked at these people who served as chief of staff or in
various cabinet positions, people who had real reputations for probity and level-headedness,
whether you shared their politics or not. I mean, these were real people. Some of them were goofballs.
But many people who just got totally trashed by proximity to him and then trashed by him
when they finally parted company with him, yeah. I mean, it's just people bent over backwards to
accommodate his norm violations and it was bad for them and it was bad for our system.
But none of that discounts the fact that we have a system that really needs a proper house
cleaning. Yes, there are bad incentives and entrenched interests and I'm not a fan of the
concept of the deep state because it's been so propagandized. But yes, there's something like
that that is not flexible enough to respond intelligently to the needs of the moment.
There's a lot of rethinking of government and of institutions in general that I think
we should do, but we need smart, well-informed, well-intentioned people to do that job. The
well-intentioned part is hugely important. Just give me someone who is not the most selfish person
anyone has ever heard about in their lifetime. What we got with Trump was literally the one
most selfish person I think anyone could name. Again, there's so much known about this, man.
That's the thing. It predates his presidency. We knew this guy 30 years ago and this is what
to come back to those inflammatory comments about Hunter Biden's laptop. The reason why I can say
with confidence that I don't care what was on his laptop is that includes any evidence of
corruption on the part of his father. Now, there's been precious little of that that's actually
emerged. As far as I can tell, there's not a big story associated with that laptop as much as
people bang on about a few emails. Even if there were just obvious corruption, Joe Biden was at
this meeting and he took this amount of money from this shady guy for bad reasons. Given how
visible the lives of these two men have been, given how much we know about Joe Biden and how
much we know about Donald Trump and how they have lived in public for almost as long as I've
been alive, both of them, the scale of corruption can't possibly balance out between the two of
them. If you show me that Joe Biden has this secret life where he's driving a Bugatti and he's
living like Andrew Tate and he's doing all these things I didn't know about, then I'm going to
start getting a sense that, all right, maybe this guy is way more corrupt than I realized. Maybe
there is some deal in Ukraine or with China that is just like this guy is not who he seems. He's
not the public servant. He's been pretending to be. He's been on the take for decades and decades,
and he's just, he's as dirty as can be. He's all mobbed up and it's a nightmare and he can't be
trusted. That's possible if you show me that his life is not at all what it seems. But on the
assumption that having looked at this guy for literally decades and knowing that every journalist
has looked at him for decades, just how many affairs is he having? Just how many drugs is he
doing? How many houses does he have? What are the obvious conflicts of interest? You hold that
against what we know about Trump, right? And I mean, the litany of indiscretions you can put
on Trump's side that testify to his personal corruption, to testify to the fact that he has
no ethical compass, there's simply no comparison. So that's why I don't care about what's on the
laptop. Now, if you tell me Trump is no longer running for president in 2024 and we can put
Trumpism behind us, and now you're saying, listen, there's a lot of stuff on that laptop that makes
Joe Biden look like a total asshole. Okay, I'm all ears, right? I mean, in 2020, it was a force
choice between a sitting president who wouldn't commit to a peaceful transfer of power and a guy
who's obviously too old to be president, who has a crack addicted son who lost his laptop,
and I just knew that I was going to take Biden in spite of whatever litany of horrors was going
to come tumbling out of that laptop. And that might involve sort of, so the actual quote is,
Hunter Biden literally could have had the corpses of children in the basement. There's a dark humor
to it, right? Which is, I think you speak to, I would not have cared. There's nothing, it's Hunter
Biden, it's not Joe Biden. Whatever the scope of Joe Biden's corruption is, it is infinitesimally
compared to the corruption. We know Trump was involved in, it's like a firefly to the sun,
is what you're speaking to. But let me make the case that you're really focused on the surface
stuff, that it's possible to have corruption that masquerades in the thing we mentioned,
which is civility. You can spend hundreds of billions of dollars or trillion towards the war
in the Middle East, for example, something that you've changed your mind on in terms of
the negative impact that it has on the world. And that, the military industrial complex,
everybody's very nice, everybody's very civil, just very upfront. Here's how we're spending the
money. Yeah, sometimes somehow disappears in different places, but that's the way war is
complicated. And it's everyone is very polite. There's no Coke and strippers or whatever is on
the laptop. It's very nice and polite. And then meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of civilians
die of hate. Just an incredible amount of hate is created because people lose their family members,
all that kind of stuff, but there's no strippers and Coke on a laptop.
But it's not just superficial. It is when someone only wants wealth and power and fame,
that is their objective function. They're like a robot that is calibrated just to those variables.
And they don't care about the risks we run on any other front. They don't care about
environmental risk, pandemic risk, nuclear proliferation risk, none of it. They're just
tracking fame and money and whatever can personally redound to their self-interest
along those lines. And they're not informed about the other risks we're running really.
In Trump, you had a president who was repeatedly asking his generals, why couldn't we use our
nuclear weapons? Why can't we have more of them? Why do I have fewer nuclear weapons than JFK?
As though that were a sign of anything other than progress. And this is the guy who's got
the button. Somebody's following him around with a bag waiting to take his order to launch.
That is a risk we should never run. One thing Trump has going for him, I think, is that he
doesn't drink or do drugs. People allege that he does speed, but let's take him in his word.
He's not deranging himself with pharmaceuticals, at least, apart from Diet Coke.
There's nothing wrong, just for the record, when you push back on that, there's nothing wrong
with Diet Coke. We could see a very large amount. I occasionally have some myself.
There's no scientific evidence that I observed the negatives of all those studies about
aspartame and all that. I hope you're right. Everything you said about the military industrial
complex is true. We've been worrying about that on both sides of the aisle for
a very long time. That phrase came from Eisenhower. So much of what ails us is a story of bad
incentives. Bad incentives are so powerful that they corrupt even good people. How much more do
they corrupt bad people? At minimum, you want reasonably good people, at least non-pathological
people in the system trying to navigate against the grain of bad incentives. Better still,
all of us can get together and try to diagnose those incentives and change them. We will really
succeed when we have a system of incentives where the good incentives are so strong that even
bad people are effortlessly behaving as though they're good people because they're so successfully
incentivized to behave that way. So it's almost the inversion of our current situation. So yes,
and you say I changed my mind about the war, not quite. I was never a supporter of the
war in Iraq. I was always worried that it was a distraction from the war in Afghanistan. I was a
supporter of the war in Afghanistan, and I will admit in hindsight, that looks like at best a
highly ambiguous and painful exercise, more likely a fool's errand. It did not turn out well.
It wasn't for want of trying. I have not done a deep dive on all of the failures there,
and maybe all of these failures are failures in principle. Maybe that's not the kind of thing
that can be done well by anybody, whatever our intentions. But yeah, the move to Iraq always
seemed questionable to me, and when we knew the immediate problem at that moment, Al-Qaeda,
was in Afghanistan, and then bouncing to Pakistan. Anyway, so yes, but my
sense of the possibility of nation building, my sense of, insofar as the neocon
spirit of responsibility and idealism, that America was the kind of nation that should
be functioning in this way as the world's cop, and we have to get in there and
untangle some of these knots by force rather often, because if we don't do it over there,
we're going to have to do it over here kind of thing. Yeah, some of that has definitely changed
for me in my thinking. There are obviously cultural reasons why it failed in Afghanistan,
and if you can't change the culture, you're not going to force a change at gunpoint
in the culture, or it certainly seems that that's not going to happen, and it took us
over 20 years to apparently to realize that. That's one of the things you realize with the
wars. There's not going to be a strong signal that things are not working. If you just keep
pouring money into a thing, a military effort. Well, also, there are signs of it working too.
You have all the stories of girls now going to school, right? The girls are getting battery
acid thrown in their faces by religious maniacs, and then we come in there and we stop that,
and now girls are getting educated, and that's all good, and our intentions are good there,
and we're on the right side of history there. Girls should be going to school. Malala Yosef
should have the Nobel Prize, and she shouldn't have been shot in the face by the Taliban, right?
We know what the right answers are there. The question is, what do you do when there are enough,
in this particular case, religious maniacs, who are willing to die and let their children die in
defense of crazy ideas and moral norms that belong in the 7th century? It's a problem we
couldn't solve, and we couldn't solve it even though we spent trillions of dollars to solve it.
This reminded me of the thing that you and Jack Dorsey jokingly had for a while,
the discussion about banning Donald Trump from Twitter, but does any of it bother you
and all the Twitter files came out? It has to do with the Hunter Biden laptop story.
Does it bother you that there could be a collection of people that make decisions about
who to ban or not, and that that could be susceptible to bias and to ideological influence?
Well, I think it always will be, or in the absence of perfect AI, it always will be.
And this becomes relevant with AI as well, because there's some censorship on AI happening,
and it's an interesting question there as well.
I don't think Twitter is as important as people think it is. And I used to think it was more
important when I was on it, and now that I'm off of it, I think it's just an unambiguously good
thing in my experience to leach your Twitter account. Even the good parts of Twitter that I
miss were bad in the aggregate, the degree to which it was fragmenting my attention,
the degree to which my life was getting doled out to me in periods between those moments where I
checked Twitter and had my attention diverted. And I was not a crazy Twitter addict. I was
probably a pretty normal user. I was not someone who was tweeting multiple times a day or even
every day. I think I probably averaged something like one tweet a day, I think I averaged. But
in reality, it would be like four tweets one day, and then I wouldn't tweet for the better part of
a week. But I was looking a lot because it was my newsfeed. I was just following 200 very smart
people, and I just wanted to see what they were paying attention to, and they would recommend
articles, and I would read those articles. And then when I would read an article, then I would
thought, I should signal boost, I would tweet. And so all of that seemed good, and that's all
separable from all of the odious bullshit that came back at me in response to this, largely in
response to this Hunter Biden thing. But even the good stuff has a downside, and it comes at
this point of your phone is this perpetual stimulus which is intrinsically fragmenting
of time and attention. And now my phone is much less of a presence in my life. And it's not that
I don't check Slack or check email. I use it to work. But my sense of just what the world is,
and my sense of my place in the world, the sense of where I exist as a person,
has changed a lot by deleting my Twitter account. And the things that I think,
I mean, we all know this phenomenon. We say if someone, that person is too online. What does it
mean to be too online? And where do you draw that boundary? How do you know what constitutes being
too online? Well, in some sense, just being, I think being on social media at all is to be too
online. I mean, given what it does to, given the kinds of information, it signal boosts. And
the impulse it kindles in each of us to reach out to our audience in specific
moments and in specific ways. There are lots of moments now where I have an opinion about
something, but there's nothing for me to do with that opinion. There's no Twitter. So there are
lots of things that I would have tweeted in the last months that are not the kind of thing I'm
going to do a podcast about. I'm not going to roll out 10 minutes on that topic on my podcast.
I'm not going to take the time to really think about it. But had I been on Twitter,
I would have reacted to this thing in the news or this thing that somebody did, right?
What do you do with that thought now? I just let go of it.
Like chocolate ice cream is the most delicious thing.
Yeah. It's usually not that sort of thing, but it's just, but then you look at the kinds of
problems people create for themselves. You look at the life deranging and reputation
destroying things that people do. And I look at the things that have, the analogous things that
have happened to me. I mean, the things that have really bent my life around professionally
over the past decade. So much of it is Twitter. I mean, honestly, in my case,
almost 100% of it was Twitter. The controversies I would get into,
the things I would think I would have to respond to in a pod, like I would release a podcast on
a certain topic, I would see some blowback on Twitter. It would give me the sense that there
was some signal that I really had to respond to. Now that I'm off Twitter, I recognize that most
of that was just, it was totally specious, right? It was not something I had to respond to.
But yet I would then do a cycle of podcasts responding to that thing that like taking my
foot out of my mouth or taking someone else's foot out of my mouth. And it became this self-perpetuating
cycle, which, I mean, if you're having fun, great. I mean, if it's generative of useful
information and engagement professionally and psychologically, great. And there was some of
that on Twitter. I mean, there were people who I connected with because I just, one of us DMed
the other on Twitter and it was hard to see how that was going to happen otherwise. But
it was largely just a machine for manufacturing unnecessary controversy.
Do you think it's possible to avoid the drug of that? So now that you've achieved this zen state,
is it possible for somebody like you to use it in a way that doesn't pull you into the whirlpool?
And so anytime there's a tax, you just, I mean, that's how I tried to use it.
Yeah, but it's not the way I wanted to use it. It's not the way it promises itself as a...
You wanted to have debate.
I wanted to actually communicate with people. I wanted to hear from the person because,
again, it's like being in Afghanistan. There are the potted cases where it's obviously good.
In Afghanistan, the girl who's getting an education, that is just here. That's why we're here. That's
obviously good. I've had those moments on Twitter where it's like, okay, I'm hearing from a smart
person who's detected an error I made in my podcast or in a book or they've just got some
great idea about something that I should spend time on. And I would never have heard from this
person in any other format. And now I'm actually in dialogue with them. And it's fantastic.
That's the promise of it, to actually talk to people. And so I kept getting lured back into that.
No, the same or sanity-preserving way of using it is just as a marketing channel. You just
put your stuff out there and you don't look at what's coming back at you. And I'm on other
social media platforms that I don't even touch. I mean, my team posts stuff on Facebook and on
Instagram. I never even see what's on there.
So you don't think it's possible to see something and not let it affect your mind?
No, that's definitely possible. But the question is, and I did that for vast
stretches of time. But then the promise of the platform is dialogue and feedback.
If I know for whatever reason, I'm going to see 99 to 1 awful feedback, bad faith feedback,
malicious feedback. Some of it's probably even bots and I'm not even aware of who's a person
who's a bot. But I'm just going to stare into this funhouse mirror of acrimony and dishonesty.
The reason why I got off is not because I couldn't recalibrate and find equanimity again
with all the nastiness that was coming back at me and not that I couldn't ignore it for
vast stretches of time. But I could see that I kept coming back to it, hoping that it would
be something that I could use, a real tool for communication. And I was noticing that it was
insidiously changing the way I felt about people, both people I know and people I don't know.
Mutual friends of ours who are behaving in certain ways on Twitter, which just seemed insane to me.
That became a signal I felt like I had to take into account somehow. You're seeing people at
their worst, both friends and strangers. And I felt that as much as I could try to recalibrate for it,
I felt that I was losing touch with what was real information because people are performing,
people are faking, people are not themselves or you're seeing people at their worst.
And so I felt like, all right, was being advertised to me here on a not just a daily basis,
an hourly basis or an increment sometimes of multiple times an hour. I probably checked Twitter
at minimum 10 times a day and maybe I was checking it 100 times a day on some days,
right, where things were really active and I was really engaged with something.
What was being delivered into my brain there was subtly false information
about how dishonest and just generally unethical,
totally normal people are capable of being. It is a funhouse mirror. I was seeing the most
grotesque versions of people who I know. People who I know I could sit down at dinner with and
they would never behave this way. And yet they were coming at me on Twitter. It was essentially
turning ordinary people into sociopaths. People are just, and there are analogies that many of
us have made. It's like one analogy is road rage. People behave in the confines of a car
in ways that they never would if they didn't have this metal box around them moving at speed.
All of that becomes quite hilarious and obviously dysfunctional when they actually
have to stop at the light next to the person they just flipped off. They didn't understand
that the person coming out of that car next to them with cauliflower ear is someone who they
never would have rolled their eyes at in public because they would have taken one look at this
person and realized this is the last person you want to fight with.
That's one of the heartbreaking things is to see people who I know, who I admire,
who I know are friends, be everything from snarky to downright mean derisive towards each other.
It doesn't make any sense. This is the only place where I've seen people I really admire
who have had a calm head about most things really be shitty to other people. It's probably the only
place I've seen that. I choose to maybe believe that that's not really them. There's something
about the system. If you go paintballing, if you, Jordan Peterson, and you're going to shoot your
friends. Yeah, you're going to shoot your friends, but you kind of accept that that's kind of what
you're doing in this little game that you're playing, but it's sometimes hard to remind yourself of
that. I think I was guilty of that definitely.
I don't think I ever did anything that I really feel bad about, but yeah, it was always pushing
me to the edge of snideness somehow. It's just not healthy. The reason why I deleted my Twitter
account in the end was that it was obviously making me a worse person. Is there some way to be on
there where he's not making you a worse person? I'm sure there is, but given the nature of the
platform and given what was coming back at me on it, the way to do that is just to basically
use it as a one-way channel of communication, just marketing. I was like, here's what I'm paying
attention to, look at it if you want to, and you just push it out, and then you don't look at what's
coming back at you. I put out a call for questions on Twitter, and then actually quite surprising,
there's a lot of good, I mean, they're like, even if they're critical, they're like being thoughtful,
which is nice. I used it that way too, and that was what kept me hooked. But then there's also
TouchBalls69 wrote a question. I can't imagine. This is part of it. One way to solve this is,
we've got to get rid of anonymity for this. Let me ask the question. Ask Sam why he sucks was the
question. That's good. Well, one reason why I sucked was Twitter, and I've since solved that
problem. TouchBalls69 should be happy that I suck a little bit less now that I'm off Twitter,
and don't have to hear from TouchBalls69 on the regular.
The fact that you have to see that, it probably can have a negative effect,
even a moderation, just to see that there is, for me, the negative effect is slightly losing faith
in the underlying kindness of humanity. You can also just reason your way out of it,
saying that this is anonymity, and this is kind of fun, and this is kind of just the
shit show of Twitter, it's okay, but it does mentally affect you a little bit.
I don't read too much into that kind of comment. It's just that's just trolling. I understand
the fun the person is having on the other side of that. It's like- Do you though?
Well, I do. I don't behave that way, but I do, and for all I know, that person could be 16 years
old. It could be also an altar con for Elon, I don't know. I'm pretty sure Elon would just
tweet that under his own name at this point. Oh, and you love each other.
Okay, so do you think, so speaking of which, now that Elon has taken over Twitter,
is there something that he could do to make this platform better?
This Twitter and just social media in general, but because of the aggressive nature of his
innovation that he's pushing, is there any way to make Twitter a pleasant place for Sam Harris?
Maybe. I don't know. I think I'm agnostic as to whether or not he or anyone could
make a social media platform that really was healthy.
So you were just observing yourself week by week, seeing the effect that's on your mind,
and on how much you're actually learning and growing as a person, and it was negative?
Yeah, and I also seen the negativity in other people's lives. I mean, it's obviously-
he's not going to admit it, but I think it's obviously negative for Elon, right? It's just
it's- that was one of the things that- when I was looking into the Funhouse Mirror,
I was also seeing the Funhouse Mirror on his side of Twitter, and it was just even more
exaggerated. It's like, when I was asking myself, why is he spending his time this way,
I then reflected on why was I spending my time this way to a lesser degree,
and at lesser scale, and at lesser risk, frankly, right? And so- and it was just so-
it's not just Twitter. I mean, it's- this is in part an internet phenomenon. It's like the
whole Hunter Biden mess that you- you explored. That was based on- I mean, I was on somebody's
podcast, but that was based on a clip taken from that podcast, which was highly misleading as to
the general shape of my remarks on that podcast. Even, you know, I had to then do my own podcast
untangling all of that and admitting that even in the full context, I was not speaking especially
well and didn't say exactly what I thought in a way that was- would have been recognizable to
anyone, you know, even someone with not functioning by a- a spirit of charity, but- but the clip was
quite distinct from the podcast itself. The reality is, is that we're living in an environment now
where people are so lazy and their- their- their attention is so fragmented that they- they only
have time for clips, but 99% of people will see a clip and will assume there's no relevant context
I need to understand what happened in that clip, right? And obviously, the people who make those
clips know that, right? And they're doing that- doing it quite maliciously. And in this case,
the person who made that clip and subsequent clips of other podcasts was quite maliciously trying to
engineer, you know, some reputational emulation for me. And being signal boosted by Elon and other
prominent people who can't take the time to watch anything other than a clip, even when it's their
friend or someone who's ostensibly their friend in that clip, right? So it's a total failure- an
understandable failure of ethics that everyone is so short on time and they're so fucking lazy
that the ch- and- and- and that we now have these contexts in which we react so quickly to things,
right? Like Twitter is inviting an- an instantaneous reaction to this clip that it's- it's just too
tempting to just say something and not know what you're even commenting on. And most- most of the
people who saw that clip don't understand what I- what I actually think about any of these issues.
And the irony is people are going to find clips from this conversation that are just as misleading
and they're going to export those and then people are going to be dunking on those clips.
And, you know, we're all living and dying by clips now and it's- it's dysfunctional.
See, I- I think it's possible to create a platform- I- I think we will keep living on clips,
but, you know, when I saw that clip of you talking about children and so on,
just knowing that you have a sense of humor, you- we just went to a dark place in terms of humor.
Right.
So, like, I didn't even bother and then I knew that the way clips work is that people will use it for
virality's sake, but the giving- giving a person benefit of the doubt- that's not even the right
term. It's not like I was- it's really, like, interpreting it in the context of the past.
The truth is- the truth is you even need- like, I even give Trump the benefit of the doubt when I
see a clip of Trump. I mean, so- because there are famous clips of Trump that are very misleading
as to what he was saying in context. And I've been honest about that. Like, the whole, you know,
there were good people on both sides scanned all around the- his remarks after Charlottesville
that the clip that got exported and got promoted by everyone, you know, left of center, from Biden
on down, you know, the New York Times, CNN, there's nobody that I'm aware of who has honestly,
you know, apologized for what they did with that clip. That- he did not say what he seemed to be
saying in that clip about the Nazis at Charlottesville, right? And I have always been very clear about
that. So it's just, you know, I- even people who I think should be marginalized and people who-
who should be defenestrated because they really are terrible people who are doing dangerous
things and for bad reasons, I think we should be honest about what they actually meant in context,
right? And this goes to anyone else we might talk about, you know, who's more- where the case
is much more confusing. But yeah, so everyone's- it's just so- and then I'm sure we're going to get
to AI, but, you know, the prospect of being able to manufacture clips with AI and deep fakes
and that where it's going to be hard for most people most of the time to even figure out that
whether they're in the presence of something real, you know, forget about being divorced from
context. There was no context. I mean, that is- that's a misinformation apocalypse that is- we
are right on the cusp of and, you know, it's terrifying. Well, it could be just a new world
like where Alice going to Wonderland or humor is the only thing we have and it will save us.
Maybe in the end, Trump's approach to social media was the right one after all. Nothing is
true and everything's absurd. But we can't live that way. People function on the basis of what
they assume is true, right? They think, you know- People have functioned.
To do anything. It's like, I mean, you have to know what you think is going to happen
or you have to at least give a probabilistic waiting over the future. Otherwise, you're-
you're going to be incapacitated by- you're not gonna- like people want certain things and they
have to have a rational plan to get those desires gratified. And they don't want to die. They don't
want their kids to die. You tell them that there's a comet hurtling toward earth and they should get
outside and look up, right? They're going to do it. And if it turns out it's misinformation, you
know, it's- it's going to matter because it comes down to like, what medicines do you give your
children, right? Like, we're going to be manufacturing fake journal articles. I mean,
this is- I'm sure someone's using chat gpt for- for this reader as we speak. And if it's not
credible- if it's not persuasive now to most people, I mean, honestly, I don't think we're
going to- I'll be amazed if it's a year before we can actually create journal articles that would
take, you know, a PhD to debunk that are completely fake. And there are people who are celebrating
this kind of, you know, coming cataclysm. But I just- it's just- there are the people who
don't have anything to lose who are celebrating it or just are so confused that they just don't
even know what's at stake. And then there are the people who have met- the few people who
we could count on a few hands who have managed to insulate themselves or at least imagine they've
insulate- insulated themselves from the downside here enough that they're not implicated in the
great unraveling we are witnessing or could- could witness.
The shaking up of what is true. So actually that returns us to experts. Do you think experts can
save us? Is there such thing as expertise and experts in something? How do you know if you've
achieved it? I think it's- it's important to acknowledge upfront that this- there's something
paradoxical about how we relate to- to authority, especially within science.
And I don't think that paradox is going away. And it's just- it doesn't have to be confusing.
It's just- and it's not- it's not truly a paradox. It's just like there are different moments in
time. So it is true to say that within science or within any- within rationality, generally,
I mean just whenever you're making- having a fact-based discussion about anything,
it is true to say that the truth or falsity of a statement does not even slightly depend
on the credentials of the person making the statement, right? So it doesn't matter if you're
a Nobel laureate, you can be wrong, right? The thing you could- the last sentence you spoke could
be total bullshit, right? And it's also possible for someone who's deeply uninformed
to be right about something or to be right for the wrong reasons, right? Or someone just gets
lucky or someone- or- or- and there- there are middling cases where you have like a- a backyard
astronomer who's got no credentials, but he just loves astronomy and he's got a telescope and it's-
he spends a lot of time looking at the night sky and he discovers a comet that no one else has seen,
you know, not even the professional expert astronomers. I mean, I gotta think that happens
less and less now, but- but some version of that keeps happening and it may always keep happening
in every area of expertise, right? So it's true that truth is orthogonal to the reputational
concerns we have among apes who are talking about the truth. But it is also true that most of the
time real experts are much more reliable than frauds or people who are not experts, right?
So- and expertise really is a thing, right? And when it's- you know, when you're flying an airplane
in a- in a storm, you don't want just randos come into the cockpit saying, listen, I've got a new
idea about how to- you know, how we should tweak these controls, right? You want someone who's a
trained pilot and- and that training gave them something, right? It gave them a set of
competences and intuitions and they- they know what all those dials and switches do, right?
And I don't, right? I shouldn't be flying that plane. So when things really matter,
you know, and put in this at 30,000 feet in a storm sharpens this up, we want real experts
to be in charge, right? And we are at 30,000 feet a lot of the time on a lot of issues, right?
And whether they're public health issues, whether it's issue- whether it's a geopolitical emergency
like Ukraine, I mean, the climate change, I mean, just pick your- pick your topic.
There are real problems and the clock is rather often ticking and their solutions are
non-obvious, right? And so expertise is a thing and deferring to experts much of the time
makes a lot of sense. It's- at minimum, it- it prevents- it has spectacular errors of incompetence
and- and just, you know, foolhardiness. But even in- in the case of some- where you're talking
about someone- I mean, people like ourselves who are like, we're well-educated, we- we're not the
worst possible candidates for, you know, the- the Dunning-Kruger effect. When we're going into a new
area where we're not experts, we're fairly alert to the possibility that we don't- you know, it's
not as simple as things seem at first and we don't- you know, we don't know how our tools translate
to this new area. We can be fairly circumspect, but we're also- because we're well-educated,
we- we can work- and we're pretty quick studies, we can learn a lot of things pretty fast and we
can begin to play a language game that sounds fairly expert, right? And in that case, the- the
invitation to do your own research, right, is in- when- when times are good, I view as an invitation
to waste your time pointlessly, right? When times are good. Now, the truth is, times are not all
that good, right? And we have the- the ongoing public display of failures of expertise. We have
experts who are obviously corrupted by bad incentives. We've got experts who, you know,
perversely won't admit they were wrong when they, in fact, you know, are demonstrated to be wrong.
We've got institutions that have been captured by political ideology that's not truth tracking,
and this- this whole woke encroachment into really every place, you know, whether it's
universities or science journals or government or- I mean, it's just like that is- that has
been genuinely deranging. So there's a lot going on that- where- where experts- and- and the very
concept of expertise has seemed to discredit itself, but the reality is that there is a
massive difference. When anything matters, when there's anything to know about anything,
there is a massive difference most of the time between someone who has really done the work
to understand that domain and someone who hasn't. And if I get sick or someone close to me gets sick,
you know, I- I have a PhD in neuroscience, right? So I can read a medical journal article
and understand a lot of it, right? And I- you know, so I'm- I'm just fairly conversant with,
you know, medical terminology. And I understand its methods and I- I'm alert to the difference
because I've- you know, because in neuroscience, I've spent hours and hours in journal clubs,
you know, diagnosing, you know, analyzing the difference between good and bad studies,
I'm- I'm alert to the difference between good and bad studies in- in medical journals,
right? And I understand that bad studies can get published and, you know, et cetera,
and- and experiments can be poorly designed. I'm alert to all of those things, but when I get sick
or when someone close to me gets sick, I don't pretend to be a doctor, right? I- I've got no
clinical experience. I don't go down the rabbit hole on Google for days at a stretch trying to
become a doctor, much less a specialist in the domain of problem that has been visited upon me
or my family, right? So if someone close to me gets cancer, I don't pretend to be an oncologist.
I don't go out and start- I don't start reading, you know, in journals of oncology
and try to really get up to speed as an oncologist because it's- it's not- it's-
one is a bad and potent- and very likely misleading use of my time, right? And it's
if I decide- if I had- if I had a lot of runway, if I decided, okay, it's really important for me
to know everything I can. At this point, I want to- I know someone's going to get cancer. I may
not go back to school and become an oncologist, but what I want to do is I want to know everything
I can know about cancer, right? So I'm going to take the next four years and spend most of my
time on cancer. Okay, I could do that, right? I still think that's a waste of my time.
Uh, I still think at the end of- even at the end of those four years, I'm not going to be the best
person to- to form intuitions about what to do in the face of the next cancer that- that I have to
confront. Um, I'm still going to want a better oncologist than I've become to tell me what he
or she would do if they were in my shoes or in the shoes of, you know, my family member.
I'm going to- you know, I'm- what I'm- what I'm not advocating- I'm not advocating a-
a blind trust and authority. Like, if you get cancer and you're talking to one oncologist and
they're recommending some course of treatment, by all means get a second opinion, get a third
opinion, right? But it matters that those opinions are coming from real experts and not from,
you know, Robert Kennedy Jr., you know, who's telling you that, you know, you got it because
you got a- you know, a vaccine, right? It's like, it's just it- it- it- there's- we're swimming in
a sea of misinformation where you've got people who are moving the opinions of millions of others
who- who should not have an opinion on these topics. Like, there's no- there is no scenario
in which you should be getting your opinion about vaccine safety or- or climate change or
uh, the war in Ukraine or anything else that we might want to talk about from
Candace Owens, right? It's just like it- like she- she's not a relevant expert on any of those
topics and what's more, she doesn't seem to care, right? And- and- and she's living in a culture
that has- that has amplified that not caring into a business model, an effective business model,
right? So it's just- it's um- and there's something very Trumpian about all that,
or like that's- that's the pro- the problem is- is the culture, it's not these- these specific
individuals. Um, so- so the paradox here is that expertise is a real thing and we defer to it a lot
as a- as a labor-saving device and it's just as- and just based on the- the reality that
it's very hard to be a polymath, right? And specialization is a thing, right? And so the
people who specialize in a very narrow topic, they know more about that topic than the next guy,
no matter how smart that- that guy or gal is, uh, and- and that- those differences matter,
but it's also true that when you're talking about facts, sometimes the- the- the best experts are
wrong. The scientific consensus is wrong. You get a- a- a sea change in the thinking of a whole
field because one person who's an outlier for whatever reason decides, okay, I'm- uh, you know,
I'm gonna prove this point and they prove it, right? So somebody like, uh, the doctor who, uh,
believed that- that stomach ulcers were not due to stress, but were due to- to, um,
H. pylori infections, right? So he just drank a vial of H. pylori bacteria and- and proved
that- and quickly got an ul- ulcer and convinced the field that- that at minimum H. pylori was
involved in- in that process. Okay, so yes, everyone was wrong. That doesn't disprove the reality of
expertise. It doesn't disprove the utility of relying on experts most of the time, especially
in an emergency, especially when the clock is ticking, especially when you're- you know, you're-
you're in this particular cockpit and you only have one chance to land this plane, right? You
want the real pilot, uh, at the controls. But there's just a few things to say. Go. So one,
you mentioned this example with cancer and doing your own research. There- there's several things
that are different about our particular time in history. One, doing your own research has become
more and more effective because you can read- the internet made information a lot more accessible,
so you can read a lot of different meta-analyses. You can read blog posts that describe to you
exactly the flaws in the different papers they make up the meta- meta-analyses. They- and- and
you can read a lot of those blog posts that are conflicting with each other, and you can take
that information in- in a short amount of time. You can start to make, um, good faith
interpretations. For example, I don't know, I don't want to overstate things, but, um, if you
suffer from depression, for example, then there- you could go to an expert and a doctor that
prescribes you some medication, but you could also challenge some of those ideas and seeing, like,
what are the different medications? What are the different side effects? What are the different
solutions to depression? All that kind of stuff. And I think depression is just a really difficult
problem that's very, um, I don't want to, again, state incorrect things, but I think it's- there's
a lot of variability of what depression really means, so it- being introspective about the type
of depression you have and the different possible solutions you have, just doing your own research
as a first step before approaching a doctor or as you have multiple opinions could be very beneficial
in that case. Now, that's depression. That's something that's been studied for a very long time
with a new pandemic that's affecting everybody. It's, uh, you know, with the airplane equated
to, like, 9-11 or something. Like, the new emergency just happened and everybody, every
expert in the world is publishing on it and talking about it. So doing your own research there could
be exceptionally effective in asking questions. And then there's a difference between experts,
virologists, and it's actually a good question. Who is exactly the expert in a pandemic? Yeah. But
there's the actual experts doing the research and publishing stuff, and then there's the
communicators of that expertise. And the question is, uh, if the communicators are flawed to- to a
degree where doing your own research is actually the more effective way to figure out policies and
solutions, because you're not competing with experts. You're competing with the communicators
of expertise. That could be WHO, CDC, in the case of the pandemic, or politicians, or political
type of science figures like Anthony Fauci. There's a question there of the effectiveness of doing
your research- your own research in that context. And the competing forces there, incentives that
you've mentioned, is you can become quite popular by being contrarian, by saying everybody's lying
to you, all the authorities are lying to you, all the institutions are lying to you. So those are the
waters you're swimming in. But I think doing your own research in that kind of context could be
quite effective. Let me be clear. I'm not saying you shouldn't do any research, right? I'm not
saying that you shouldn't be informed about an issue. I'm not saying you shouldn't read
articles on- on whatever the topic is. And yes, if I got cancer or someone close to me got cancer,
I- I- I- I probably would read more about cancer than I've read thus far about cancer. And I've read
some. So I'm not- I'm not making a virtue of ignorance and a blind obedience to authority.
And I- and again, I recognize that- that authorities can discredit themselves or they can
be wrong. They can be wrong even when they- when there's no discredit. There's just- there's a
lot we don't understand about the- the nature of the world. But still this- this vast gulf
between truly informed opinion and bullshit exists. It always exists. And- and conspiracy thinking is
rather often, you know, most of the time, the species of bullshit, but it's not always wrong,
right? There are real conspiracies and there- there really are just awful
corruptions of, you know, but born of bad incentives within our, you know, our scientific
processes within institutions. And again, we've mentioned a lot of these things in passing,
but what- what woke political ideology did to scientific communication during the pandemic
was awful and was really corrosive of public trust, especially on the- on the right.
Right? For understandable reasons. It was just- it was crazy, some of the things that were being
said and still is. And these cases are all different. You take depression. We just don't
know enough about depression for, you know, anyone to be that confident about anything,
right? And there are many different modalities in which to interact with it as a problem,
right? So there's- you have pharmaceuticals, have whatever promise they have, but there's-
there's certainly a reason to be concerned that they don't work well for everybody and- and
I mean, that's- it's obvious they don't work well for everybody, but they do work for some people.
But again, depression is a multifactorial problem and there- there are different levels
at which to- to influence it. And there are, you know, there are things like meditation,
there are things like- you just- life changes and- and, you know, one of the perverse things
about depression is that when you're depressed, all of the things that would be good for you to do
are precisely the things you don't want to do. You don't have any energy to socialize, you don't
want to get things done, you don't want to exercise, you don't- and all of those things,
if you got those up and running, they do make you feel better in- you know, in the aggregate.
But the reality is that there- you know, there are clinical level depressions that are so bad
that it's just- we just don't have good tools for them. And it's not enough to tell- there's no
life change someone's gonna- gonna embrace that it's going to be an obvious remedy for that.
The pan- I mean, pandemics are- are obviously a complicated problem, but I- I would consider it
much simpler than depression in terms of, you know, what's on the menu to be chosen among, you
know, the various choices. Just less multifactorial. The logic by which you would make those choices,
yeah. So it's like, we have a virus, we have a new virus, it's some version of bad, you know,
it's human transmissible, we're still catching up- we're catching up to every aspect of it.
We don't know how it spreads. We don't know how- how effective masks are.
Well, to a certain point, we knew it was respiratory, but we- but how- but yeah,
but whether it's- we had spread by fomites, like all that, we were confused about a lot of things,
and we're still confused. It's been a moving target this whole time, and it's been changing
this whole time. And our responses to it have been, you know, we- we ramped up the vaccines as
quickly as we- as we could, but, you know, too quick for some, not as- not quick enough for others.
We could have done human challenge trials and got them out more quickly with- with- with better
data. And I think that's something we should probably look at in the future, because, you know,
that- you know, to my eye, that would make ethical sense to do- to do challenge trials.
But- and so much of my concern about COVID- I mean, many people are confused about my
concern about COVID. My- my concern about COVID has for much of the time not been narrowly focused
on COVID itself and how dangerous I perceive COVID to be as a- as a illness. It has been,
for the longest time, even more a concern about our ability to respond to a truly scary pathogen
next time. Like, I- I- for, you know, outside those initial months, you know, give me the- the
first six months to be quite worried about COVID and- and the unraveling of society, but-
And the supply of toilet paper.
You want to secure a steady supply of toilet paper. But beyond that initial period,
when we had a sense of what we were dealing with, and we had every hope that the vaccines are
actually going to work, and we're getting- and we knew we were getting those vaccines in short
order, right? Beyond that, and we had- and we knew just how dangerous the illness was and how
dangerous it wasn't. For years now, I've just been worrying about this as a failed dress rehearsal
for something much worse, right? I think what we proved to ourselves at this moment in history is
that we have built informational tools that we do not know how to use, to- and we have made
ourselves- we've basically enrolled all of human society into a psychological experiment
that is deranging us and making it virtually impossible to solve
coordination problems that we absolutely have to solve next time when things are worse.
Do you understand who's at fault for the way this unraveled? The way we didn't seem to have
the distrust in institutions and the institution of science that grew,
like seemingly exponentially, or got revealed through this process. Who is at fault here?
And what's the fix? So much blame to go around, but so much of it is not a matter of
bad people conspiring to do bad things. It's a matter of incompetence and misaligned incentives
and just ordinary plain vanilla dysfunction. But my problem was that people like you,
people like Brett Weinstein, people like that I look to for reasonable, difficult conversations
on difficult topics, have a little bit lost their mind, became emotional and dogmatic in style of
conversation, perhaps not in the depth of actual ideas, but they're a tweet something of that nature,
and not about you, but just it feels like the pandemic made people really more emotional than
before. And then Kimball Musk responded, I think something I think you probably would agree with,
maybe not. I think it was the combo of Trump and the pandemic. Trump triggered the far left to
be way more active than they could have been without him. And then the pandemic handed big
government nanny state left these a huge platform on a silver platter. I want to punch and here we
are. I would agree with some of that. I'm not sure how much to read into the nanny state
concept. But yet basically got people on the far left really activated and then gave control to,
I don't know if you say nanny state, but just control to government that when executed poorly
has created a complete distrust in government. My fear is that there was going to be that complete
distrust anyway, given the nature of the information space, given the level of conspiracy
thinking, given the gaming of these tools by an anti-vax cult. I mean, there really is an
anti-vax cult that just ramped up its energy during this moment.
But it's a small one.
It's not to say that everything, every concern about vaccines is a species of,
it was born of misinformation or born of this cult, but there is a cult that is just,
and the core of Trumpism is a cult. I mean, the QAnon is a cult. And so there's a lot of lying
and there's a lot of confusion. It's almost impossible to exaggerate how confused some
people are and how fully their lives are organized around that confusion. I mean,
there are people who think that the world's being run by pedophile cannibals and that Tom
Hanks and Oprah Winfrey and Michelle Obama are among those cannibals. I mean, they're
adjacent to the pure crazy, there's the semi-crazy, and adjacent to the semi-crazy,
there's the grifting opportunist asshole. And the layers of bad faith are hard to fully
diagnose, but the problem is all of this is getting signal boosted by an outrage machine
that is preferentially spreading misinformation. It has a business model
that is guaranteed that is preferentially sharing misinformation.
Can I actually just on a small tangent, how do you defend yourself against the claim that you're
a pedophile cannibal? It's difficult.
Here's the case I would make, because I don't think you can use reason.
I think you have to use empathy. I find it very difficult to believe that anyone
believes these things. I'm sure there's some number of people who are just pretending to
believe these things because it's just, again, this is sort of like the four-chanification
of everything. It's just Pepe the Frog. None of this is what it seems. They're not signaling
an alliance with white supremacy or neo-Nazism, but they're not doing it. They just don't fucking
care. It's just cynicism overflowing its banks. It's just fun to wind up the normies. Look at
all the normies that don't understand that a green frog is just a green frog, even when it
isn't just a green frog. It's just gumming up everyone's cognitive bandwidth with bullshit.
I get that that's fun if you're a teenager and you just want to vandalize our
new sphere, but at a certain point, we have to recognize that real questions of human
welfare are in play. There's wars getting fought or not fought, and there's a pandemic
raging, and there's medicine to take or not take. To come back to this issue of COVID,
I don't think I got so out of balance around COVID. I think people are quite confused about
what I was concerned about. Yes, there was a period where I was crazy because anyone who
was taking it seriously was crazy because they had no idea what was going on. Yes, I was wiping
down packages with alcohol wipes because people thought it was transmissible by touch.
When we realized that was no longer the case, I stopped doing that. Again, it was a moving
target, and a lot of things we did in hindsight around masking and school closures
looked fairly dysfunctional, unnecessary. I think the criticism that people would
say about you're talking about COVID, and maybe you can correct me, but you were
skeptical or you were against skepticism of the safety and efficacy of the vaccine.
People who get nervous about the vaccine but don't fall into the usual anti-vax camp,
which I think there was a significant enough number. They were getting nervous.
I mean, especially after the war in Afghanistan and Iraq, I too was nervous about anything
where a lot of money could be made. You just see how the people who are greedy,
they come to the surface all of a sudden, and a lot of them that run institutions,
actually really good human beings. I know a lot of them, but it's hard to know
how those two combine together when there's hundreds of billions, trillions of dollars
to be made. I guess the sense was that you weren't open enough to the skepticism.
I understand that people have that sense. I'll tell you how I thought about it and think about it.
One, again, it was a moving target. There was a point in the timeline where
it was totally rational to expect that the vaccines were both working, but both they were
reasonably safe and that COVID was reasonably dangerous. The trade-off for basically everyone
was it was rational to get vaccinated given the level of testing and how many people had
been vaccinated before you, given what we were seeing with COVID, that that was a forced choice.
You're eventually going to get COVID and the question is, do you want to be vaccinated when
you do? There was a period where that forced choice, it was just obviously reasonable to
get vaccinated, especially because there was every reason to expect that while it wasn't a
perfectly sterilizing vaccine, it was going to knock down transmission a lot and that matters.
It wasn't just a personal choice. You were actually being a good citizen when you decided to run
whatever risk you were going to run to get vaccinated because there are people in our
society who actually can't get vaccinated. I know people who can't take any vaccines,
they're so allergic to it. They in their own person seem to justify all of the fears of the
anti-vax cult. They're the kind of person who Robert Kennedy Jr. can point to and say,
vaccines will fucking kill you because of the experience. I know people who have
kids who fit that description. We should all feel a civic responsibility to be vaccinated against
egregiously awful and transmissible diseases for which we have relatively safe vaccines
to keep those sorts of people safe. There was a period of time when it was thought that the
vaccine could stop transmission. Yes. All of this has begun to shift. I don't think it has
shifted as much as Brett Weinstein thinks it's shifted, but yes, there are safety concerns around
the mRNA vaccines, especially for young men. As far as I know, that's the purview of actual
heightened concern, but also there's now a lot of natural immunity out there. Basically,
everyone who was going to get vaccinated has gotten vaccinated. The virus has evolved to the
point in this context where it seems less dangerous. Again, I'm going more on the seemings than on
research that I've done at this point, but I'm certainly less worried about getting COVID. I've
had it once. I've been vaccinated. You ask me now, how do I feel about getting the next booster?
I don't know that I'm going to get the next booster. I was somebody who was waiting in line
at four in the morning, hoping to get some overflow vaccine when it was first available.
And at that point, given what I thought I knew based on the best sources I could consult and
based on anecdotes that were too vivid to ignore, both data and personal experience,
it was totally rational for me to want to get that vaccine as soon as I could.
And now, I think it's totally rational for me to do a different kind of cost-benefit analysis
and wonder, listen, do I really need to get a booster? How many of these boosters am I going
to get for the rest of my life? Really? And how safe is the mRNA vaccine for a man of my age?
And do I need to be worried about myocarditis? All of that is completely rational to talk about
now. My concern is that at every point along the way, I was the wrong person and Brett Weinstein
was the wrong person, and there's many other people I could add to this list, to have strong
opinions about any of this stuff. I just disagree with that. I think, yes, in theory, I agree 100%,
but I feel like experts failed at communicating, not at doing...
They did.
And I just feel like you and Brett Weinstein actually have the tools with the internet,
given the engine you have in your brain of thinking for months at a time, deeply about the
problems that face our world, that you actually have the tools to do pretty good thinking here.
The problem I have with experts...
But there would be deference to experts and pseudo-experts behind all of that.
Well, the papers, you would stand on the shoulders of giants, but you can surf those
shoulders better than the giants themselves.
Yeah, but I knew we were going to disagree about that. I saw his podcast where he brought on these
experts who had, many of them, had the right credentials, but for a variety of reasons,
they didn't pass the smell test for me. One larger problem, and this goes back to the problem of
how we rely on authority in science, is that you can always find a PhD or an MD
to champion any crackpot idea. It is amazing, but you could find PhDs and MDs who would sit
up there in front of Congress and say that they thought smoking was not addictive, or that it
was not harmful to... There was no direct link between smoking and lung cancer.
You could always find those people. Some of the people Brett found were people who had
obvious tells to my point of view, to my eye. I saw them on some of the same people
who were on Rogan's podcast. It's hard because if a person does have the right credentials,
and they're not saying something floridly mistaken, and we're talking about something
where they're genuine unknowns, like how much do we know about the safety of these vaccines?
It's at that point not a whole hell of a lot. We have no long-term data on mRNA vaccines,
but to confidently say that millions of people are going to die because of these vaccines,
and to confidently say that ivermectin is a panacea, ivermectin is the thing that prevents
COVID, there was no good reason to say either of those things at that moment. Given that that's
where Brett was, I felt like there was nothing to debate. We're both the wrong people to be
getting into the weeds on this. We're both going to defer to our chosen experts. His experts look
like crackpots to me, or at least the ones who are most vociferous on those edgiest points,
that seem most... Your experts seem like, what is the term, mask hysteria? I forgot the term.
No, but it's like with climate science. This old, it's received as a canard in
half of our society now, but the claim that 97% of climate scientists agree that human-caused
climate change is a thing. Do you go with the 97% most of the time, or do you go with the 3% most
of the time? It's obvious you go with the 97% most of the time for anything that matters.
It's not to say that the 3% are always wrong. Again, things get overturned, and yes,
as you say, I've spent much more time worrying about this on my podcast than I've spent worrying
about COVID, our institutions have lost trust for good reason. It's an open question whether
we can actually get things done with this level of transparency and pseudo-transparency,
given our information ecosystems. Can we fight a war, really fight a war that we may have to
fight, like the next Nazis? Can we fight that war when everyone with an iPhone is showing just how
awful it is that little girls get blown up when we drop our bombs? Could we as a society
do what we might have to do to actually get necessary things done when we're living in this
panopticon of just everyone's a journalist, everyone's a scientist, everyone's an expert,
everyone's got direct contact with the facts or some or semblance of the facts? I don't know.
I think yes, and I think voices like yours are exceptionally important, and I think there's
certain signals you send in your ability to steal me on the other side, in your empathy,
essentially. That's the fight, that's the mechanism by which you resist
the dogmatism of this binary thinking, and then if you become a trusted person that's able to
consider the other side, then people will listen to you as the aggregators, the communicator of
expertise, because the virologists haven't been able to be good communicators. I still to this day
don't really know, what am I supposed to think about the safety and efficacy of the
vaccines today? As it stands today, what are we supposed to think? What are we supposed to think
about testing? What are we supposed to think about the effectiveness of masks or lockdowns?
Where's the great communicator on this topic that considered all the other conspiracy theories,
all the other, all the communication that's out there, and actually aggregating it together and
being able to say this is actually what's most likely the truth? And also some of that has to do
with humility, epistemic humility, knowing that you can't really know for sure, just like with
depression, you can't really know for sure. I'm not seeing those communications being
effectively done, even still today. Well, the jury is still out on some of it, and again,
it's a moving target. And some of it, it's complicated, some of it's a self-fulfilling
dynamic where, so like lockdowns, in theory, a lockdown would work if we could only do it,
but we can't really do it. And there's a lot of people who won't do it because they're convinced
that this is the totalitarian boot on finally on the neck of the good people who
are always having their interests traduced by the elites. So like this is, if you have enough
people who think the lockdown, for any reason in the face of any conceivable illness,
right, is just code for the New World Order coming to fuck you over and take your guns, right?
Okay, you have a society that is now immune to reason, right? Because there are absolutely
certain pathogens that we should lock down for next time, right? And it was completely rational
in the beginning of this thing to attempt to lock down. We never really locked down
to attempt some semblance of a lockdown, just to quote, bend the curve, to spare our
healthcare system, given what we were seeing happening in Italy, right? Like that moment
was not hard to navigate, at least in my view. It was obvious at the time, in retrospect, my
views on that haven't changed, except for the fact that I recognize maybe it's just impossible
given the nature of people's response to that kind of demand, right? We live in a society that's
just not going to lock down. Unless the pandemic is much more deadly. Right. So that's a point I
made, which was maliciously clipped out from some other podcast where someone's trying to
make it look like I want to see children die. There's a pity more children didn't die from COVID,
right? This is actually the same person who, and that's the other thing that got so poisoned here.
That person, this psychopath or effective psychopath who's creating these clips of me on
podcasts, the second clip of me seeming to say that I wish more children died during COVID,
but it was so clear in context what I was saying, that even the clip betrayed the context so it
didn't actually work. This psycho, and again, I don't know whether he actually is a psychopath,
but he's behaving like one because of the incentives of Twitter, this is somebody who
Brett Signal Boosted as a very reliable source of information, right? He kept retweeting this
guy at me, against me, right? And this guy, at one glance, I knew how unreliable this guy was,
right? But I think I'm not at all sad. One thing I think I did wrong, one thing that I do regret,
one thing I have not sorted out for myself is how to navigate the professional and personal
pressure that gets applied at this moment where you have a friend or an acquaintance or someone you
know who's behaving badly in public or behaving in a way that you think is bad in public.
And they have a public platform where they're influencing a lot of people,
and you have your own public platform where you're constantly getting asked to comment on what this
friend or acquaintance or colleague is doing. I haven't known what I think is ethically right
about the choices that seem forced on us at moments like this. So I've criticized you in public
about your interview with Kanye. Now, in that case, I reached out to you in private first and
told you exactly what I thought. And then when I was going to get asked in public or when I was
touching that topic on my podcast, I more or less said the same thing that I said to you in
private, right? Now, that was how I navigated that moment. I did the same thing with Elon,
at least at the beginning. We have maintained good vibes, which is not what I want to say about
Elon. I disagree with you because good vibes in the moment, there's a deep core of good vibes
that persists through time between you and Elon. And I would argue probably between some of the
other folks you mentioned. I think with Brett, I failed to reach out in private
to the degree that I should have. We had tried to set up a conversation in private that never
happened, but there was some communication. But it would have been much better for me to have made
more of an effort in private than I did before it spilled out into public. And I would say that's
true with other people as well. What kind of interaction in private do you think you should
have with Brett? Because my case would be beforehand and now still. The case I would like in this
part of the criticism you sent my way, maybe it's useful to go to that direction. Actually,
let's go to that direction because I think I disagree with your criticism as you stated publicly.
You're talking about your interview with Kanye? Yeah. The thing you criticized me for is actually
the right thing to do with Brett. Okay. You said Lex could have spoken with Kanye in such a way as
to have produced a useful document. He didn't do that because he has a fairly naive philosophy
about the power of love. Let's see if you can maintain that philosophy in the present.
Let's go. He's beautiful. He seemed to think that if he just got through the minefield
to the end of the conversation where the two of them still were feeling good about one another
and they can hug it out, that would be by definition a success. So let me make the case
for this power of love philosophy. And first of all, I love you, Sam. You're still an inspiration
and somebody I deeply admire. Okay. Back at you. To me, in the case of Kanye,
it's not only that you get through the conversation and have hugs, it's that the
display that you're willing to do that has power. So even if it doesn't end in hugging,
the actual, the turning the other cheek, the act of turning the other cheek itself communicates
both to Kanye later and to the rest of the world that we should have empathy and compassion
towards each other. There is power to that. Maybe that is naive, but I believe in the
power of that. So it's not that I'm trying to convince Kanye that some of his ideas are wrong,
but I'm trying to illustrate that just the act of listening and truly trying to understand the
human being, that is opens people's minds to actually questioning their own beliefs more.
It takes them out of the dogmatism, de-escalates the kind of dogmatism that I've been seeing.
So in that sense, I would say the power of love is the philosophy you might apply to Brett,
because the right conversation you have in private is not about, hey, listen, you're,
you know, the experts you're talking to, they seem credentialed, but they're not actually
as credentials as they illustrating, they're not grounding their findings in actual meta-analyses
and papers and so on, like making a strong case like, what are you doing? This is going to get a
lot of people in trouble, but instead just saying, like being a friend in the dumbest of ways, being
respectful, sending love their way, and just having a conversation outside of all of this.
Like basically showing that, like removing the emotional attachment to this debate,
even though you are very emotionally attached, because in the case of COVID specifically,
there is a very large number of lies at stake, but removing all of that and remembering that you
have a friendship. Yeah, well, so I think these are highly non-analogous cases, right? So your
conversation with Kanye misfired from my point of view for a very different reason. It was,
and it was, it has to do with Kanye. I mean, so Kanye, I don't know, I've never met Kanye,
so obviously I don't know him, but I think he's either obviously in the midst of a mental health
crisis, or he's a colossal asshole, or both. I mean, actually those aren't mutually exclusive.
So one of three possibilities, he's either mentally ill, he's an asshole, or he's mentally ill
and an asshole. I think all three of those possibilities are possible for the both of us
as well at the moment. No, I would argue none of those are likely for either of us.
But not to say we don't have our moments. So the reason not to talk to Kanye,
so I think you should have had the conversation you had with him in private. That's great,
and I've got no criticism of what you said had it been in private. In public, I just thought
you're not doing him a favor. If he's mentally ill, he's in the middle of a
manic episode, or I'm not a clinician, but I've heard it said of him that he is bipolar,
you're not doing him a favor sticking a mic in front of him and letting him
go off on the Jews or anything else. We know what he thought about the Jews. We know that
there's not much illumination that's going to come from him on that topic.
If it is a symptom of his mental illness that he thinks these things,
you're not doing him a favor making that even more public. If he's just an asshole and he's
just an anti-semite, an ordinary garden variety anti-semite, well then there's also not much to
say unless you're really going to dig in and kick the shit out of him in public. I'm saying you can
do that with love. That's the other thing here is that I don't agree that compassion and love always
have this patient embracing acquiescent face. They don't always feel good to the recipient.
There is a sort of wisdom that you can wield compassionately in moments like that where
someone's full of shit and you just make it absolutely clear to them and to your audience
that they're full of shit. There's no hatred being communicated. In fact, you could just
like, listen, I'm going to do everyone a favor right now and just take your foot out of your
mouth. The truth is, I just wouldn't have aired the conversation. I just don't think it was a
document that had to get out there. This is not a signal you're likely to get from your
audience. I get that many people in your audience thought, oh my god, that's awesome. You're talking
to Kanye and you're doing it in Lex style where it's just love and you're not treating him like
a pariah and you're holding this tension between he's this creative genius who is work we love
and yet he's having this moment that's so painful and what a tight rope walk. I get that maybe 90%
of your audience saw it that way. They're still wrong and I still think that was unbalanced,
not a good thing to put out into the world. You don't think it opens up the mind and heart
of people that listen to that just have it? If it's opening it up in the wrong
direction where just gale force nonsense is coming in. I think we should have an open mind
and an open heart, but there's some clear things here that we have to keep in view.
The mental illness component is its own thing. I don't pretend to understand what's going on
with him, but insofar as that's the reason he's saying what he's saying, do not put this guy on
camera and let no one see it. Sorry, in that point real quick, I had a bunch of conversations with
him offline and I didn't get a sense of mental illness. That's why I chose to sit down and I
didn't get it. I mean, mental illness is such a... But when it shows up in a gimp put on Alex
Jones' podcast, is it either that's more genius performance in his world or he's unraveling further?
I wouldn't put that under mental illness. We have to... I think there's another conversation to be had
about how we treat artists because they're weirdos. They're very... I mean, taking words
from Akanya as if he's at Christopher Hitchens or something like that, very eloquent, researched,
written many books on history, on politics, on geopolitics, on psychology. Akanya didn't
do any of that. He's an artist just spouting off. And so it's a different style of conversation
and a different way to treat the words that are coming out of his mouth.
Let's leave the mental illness aside. If we're going to say that there's no reason to think
he's mentally ill and this is just him being creative and brilliant and opinionated,
well, then that falls into the asshole bucket for me. Then he's someone... And honestly,
the most offensive thing about him in that interview from my point of view is not the
anti-Semitism, which we can talk about because I think there are problems just letting him
spread those memes as well. But the most offensive thing is just how delusionally
egocentric he is or was coming off in that interview and in others. He has an estimation
of himself as this omnibus genius to not only rival Shakespeare, to exceed Shakespeare. He's
the greatest mind that has ever walked among us. And he's more or less explicit on that point.
And yet he manages to talk for hours without saying anything actually interesting or insightful
or factually illuminating. So it's complete delusion of a very Trumpian sort. It's like
when Trump says he's a genius who understands everything, but nobody takes him seriously,
it one wonders whether Trump takes himself seriously. Kanye seems to believe his own
press. He actually thinks he's just a colossus. And he may be a great musician. I'm not...
Certainly not my wheelhouse to compare him to any other musicians, but
one thing that's patently obvious from your conversation is he's not who he thinks he is
intellectually or ethically or in any other relevant way. And so when you
couple that to the anti-Semitism he was spreading, which was genuinely noxious and
ill-considered and has potential knock-on effects in the black community. I mean,
there's an ambient level of anti-Semitism in the black community that is worth
worrying about and talking about anyway. There's a bunch of guys playing the knockout game in
Brooklyn just punching Orthodox Jews in the face. And I think letting Kanye air his anti-Semitism,
that publicly only raises the likelihood of that rather than diminishes it.
I don't know. So let me say just a couple of things. So one, my belief at the time
was it doesn't. It decreases it. Showing empathy while pushing back
decreases the likelihood of that. It might on the surface look like it's increasing it,
but that's simply because the anti-Semitism or the hatred in general is brought to the surface.
And then people talk about it. But I should also say that you're one of the only people
that wrote to me privately criticizing me. And out of the people I really respect and admire.
And that was really valuable that I had to, it's painful because I had to think through it for a
while. And it still haunts me because the other kind of criticism I got a lot of, people basically
said things towards me based on who I am that they hate me. You mean anti-Semitic things?
Yeah, anti-Semitic things. I just hate the word anti-Semitic. It's like racist.
But here's the reality. So I'm Jewish, although obviously not religious.
I've been a student of the Holocaust, obviously. I know a lot about that. And there's reason to
be a student of the Holocaust. But in my lifetime and in my experience, I have never
taken anti-Semitism very seriously. I have not worried about it. I have not
made a thing of it. I've done exactly one podcast on it. I had Barry Weiss on my podcast
when her book came out. But it really is a thing. And it's something we have to keep an eye on
societally because it's a unique kind of hatred. It's unique in that it's knit together with,
it's not just ordinary racism. It's knit together with lots of conspiracy theories that never seem
to die out. It can by turns equally animate the left and the right politically. I mean,
it was so perverse about anti-Semitism, look in the American context. With the far right,
with white supremacists, Jews aren't considered white. So they hate us in the same spirit in
which they hate black people or brown people or anyone who's not white. But on the left,
Jews are considered extra white. We're the extra beneficiaries of white privilege.
In the black community, that is often the case. We're a minority that has thrived. And it seems
to stand as a counterpoint to all of the problems that other minorities suffer,
in particular African-Americans in the American context. Asians are now getting a little bit
of this, like the model minority issue. But Jews have had this going on for centuries and millennia.
And it never seems to go away. And again, this is something that I've never focused on. But
this has been at a slow boil for as long as we've been alive. And there's no guarantee it
can't suddenly become much, much uglier than we have any reason to expect it to become,
even in our society. And so there's kind of a special concern at moments like that where you
have an immensely influential person in a community who already has a checkered history with respect
to their own beliefs about the Jews and the conspiracies and all the rest. And he's just
messaging, not especially fully opposed by you and anyone else who's given him the microphone at
that moment to the world. And so that made my spidey sense tingle.
Yeah, it's complicated. The stakes are very high. And I, somebody who's been obviously family and
also reading a lot about World War II, and just this whole period, it was a very difficult
conversation. But I believe in the power, especially given who I am of not always,
but sometimes often turning the other cheek. Oh yeah. And again, things change
when they're for public consumption. The cut for me that has just the use case,
I keep stumbling upon is the kinds of things that I will say on a podcast like this, or
if I'm giving a public lecture, versus the kinds of things I will say at dinner with strangers or
with friends. Like if you're in an elevator, like if I'm in an elevator with strangers, I do not
feel, and I hear someone say something stupid, I don't feel an intellectual responsibility to
turn around in the confines of that space with them and say, listen, that thing you just said
about X, Y, or Z is completely false and here's why. But if somebody says it in front of me on
some public dais where I'm actually talking about ideas, that's when there's a different
responsibility that comes online. The question is how you say it? How you say it?
Or even whether you say anything in those, I mean, there are moments, there are definitely
moments to privilege civility or just to pick your battles. I mean, sometimes it's just not
worth it to get into it with somebody out in real life.
I just believe in the power of empathy both in the elevator and when a bunch of people are listening,
that when they see you willing to consider another human being's perspective,
it just gives more power to your words after.
Well, yeah, but until it doesn't, because you can extend charity too far. It can be absolutely
obvious what someone's motives really are and they're dissembling about that. And so then you're
taking at face value, their representations begins to look like you're just being duped
and you're not actually doing the work of putting pressure on a bad actor.
So again, the mental illness component here makes it very difficult to think about
what you should or shouldn't have said to Kanye.
So I think the topic of platforming is pretty interesting. What's your view on
platforming controversial people? Let's start with the old, would you interview Hitler
on your podcast? And how would you talk to him? Oh, and follow question. Would you interview him
in 1935, 41, and then like 45?
Well, I think we have an uncanny valley problem with respect to this issue of
whether or not to speak to bad people. So if a person's sufficiently bad,
right, if they're all the way out of the valley, then you can talk to them and it's just totally
unproblematic to talk to them because you don't have to spend any time signaling to your audience
that you don't agree with them. And if you're interviewing Hitler, you don't have to say,
listen, I just got to say before we start, I don't agree with the whole genocide thing.
And I just think you're killing mental patients and vans and all that. That was all bad as a
bad look. It can go without saying that you don't agree with this person and you're not
platforming them to signal boost their views. You're just trying to... If they're sufficiently evil,
you can go into it very much as an anthropologist would... You just want to understand
the nature of evil. You just want to understand this phenomenon, like how is this person
who they are? And that strikes me as a intellectually interesting and
morally necessary thing to do, right? So, yes, I think you always interview Hitler.
Well, once he's... But when do you know it?
Once he's legitimately... But when do you know it? Is the genocide really happening?
42, 43? No, if you're on the cusp of it where it's just he's someone who's gaining power and you
don't want to help facilitate that, then there's a question of whether you can undermine him
while pushing back against him in that interview. So, there are people I wouldn't talk to
just because I don't want to give them oxygen and I don't think that in the context of my
interviewing them, I'm going to be able to take the wind out of their sails at all, right?
For whatever... Either because an asymmetric advantage because I just know that they can
do something within the span of an hour that I can't correct for.
It's like they can light many small fires and it just takes too much time to put them out.
That's more like on the topic of vaccines, for example, having a debate on the efficacy of
vaccines. Yeah. It's not that I don't think sunlight is usually the best disinfectant,
I think it is. Even these asymmetries aside, I mean, it is true that a person can always make
a mess faster than you can clean it up, right? But still, there are debates worth having even
given that limitation and they're the right people to have those specific debates. There's
certain topics where I'll debate someone just because I'm the right person for the job and
it doesn't matter how messy they're going to be. It's just worth it because I can make my points
land at least to the right part of the audience. So, some of it is just your own skill and
competence and also interest in preparing correctly? Well, yeah. In the nature of the
subject matter, but there are other people who just by default, I would say, well,
there's no reason to give this guy a platform. And there are also people who are so confabulatory
that they're making such a mess with every sentence that insofar as you're even trying
to interact with what they're saying, you're by definition going to fail and you're going to seem
to fail to an sufficiently large uninformed audience where it's going to be a net negative
for the cause of truth, no matter how good you are. So, for instance, I think talking to Alex
Jones on any topic for any reason is probably a bad idea because I just think he's just
neurologically wired under a string of sentences. He'll get 20 sentences out,
each of which contains more lies than the last. And there's not time enough in the world
to run down and certainly not time enough in the span of a conversation
to run down each of those leads to bedrock so as to falsify it. I mean, he'll just make
shit up or make shit up and then weave it in with half-truths and micro-truths
that give some semblance of credibility to somebody out there. I mean, apparently millions
of people out there. And there's just no way to untangle that in real time with him.
I have noticed that you have an allergic reaction to confabularitization.
Yeah, confabulation.
Confabulation, that if somebody says something a little micro-untruth,
it really stops your brain.
Here, I'm not talking about micro-untruths, I'm just talking about making up things out of
whole cloth. Just like, if someone says something, well, what about, and then the thing they put
at the end of that sentence is just a set of pseudo-facts, right, that you can't possibly
authenticate or not in the span of that conversation. Whether it's about UFOs or anything else,
right, they will seem to make you look like an agonormous when, in fact, everything they're
saying is specious, whether they know it or not. I mean, there's some people who are just
crazy, there's some people who are just bullshitting and they're not even tracking
whether it's true, it just feels good, and then some people are consciously lying about things.
Don't you think there's just a kind of jazz masterpiece of untruth that you should be able to
just wave off by saying, well, none of that is backed up by any evidence and just almost
take it to the humor place? Well, the thing is, the place I'm familiar with doing this and not
doing this is on specific conspiracies like 9-11 truth. Because of what 9-11 did to my
intellectual life, and they really just, you know, it sent me down a path for the better part
of a decade. Like, I became a critic of religion. I don't know if I was ever going to be a critic
of religion, right? But it happened to be in my wheelhouse because I spent so much time
studying religion on my own. And I was also very interested in the underlying spiritual
concerns of every religion. And so I was, you know, I devoted more than a full decade of my life
to just, you know, what is real here? What is possible? What is the nature of subjective
reality? And how does it relate to reality at large? And is there anything to, you know, who was
someone like Jesus or Buddha? And are these people frauds? Are these just myths? Or is there really
a continuum of insight to be had here that is interesting? So I spent a lot of time on that
question through my 20, the full decade of my 20s.
And that was launched in part by 9-11 truth or?
No, but then when 9-11 happened, I had spent all this time reading religious books,
understanding, empathically understanding the motivations of religious people, right? Knowing
just how fully certain people believe what they say they believe, right? So I took religious
convictions very seriously. And then people started flying planes into our buildings. And I,
so I knew that there was something to be said about that.
Allegedly.
The core doctrine to Islam, exactly. So I went down, so that became my wheelhouse for a time,
you know, terrorism and jihadism and related topics. And so the 9-11 truth conspiracy thing
kept getting aimed at me. And the question was, well, do I want to debate these people?
Yeah. Alex Jones, perhaps.
Yeah. So Alex Jones, I think, was an early purveyor of it, although I don't think I knew
who he was at that point. And so, and privately, I had some very long debates with people who,
you know, one person in my family went way down that rabbit hole. And I just, you know,
every six months or so, I'd literally write the two-hour email, you know, that would try to
deprogram them, you know, however ineffectually. And so I went back and forth for years on that
topic in private with people. But I could see the structure of the conspiracy. I could see the
nature of how impossible it was to play whack-a-mole sufficiently well so as to convince
anyone of anything who was not seeing the problematic structure of that way of thinking.
I mean, it's not actually a thesis. It's a proliferation of anomalies that don't,
you can't actually connect all the dots that are being pointed to. They don't connect in a
coherent way. They're incompatible, and their incompatibility is not being acknowledged.
But they're running this algorithm of things are never what they seem. There's always
malicious conspirators doing things perfectly. We see evidence of human incompetence everywhere
else. No one can tie their shoes, you know, expertly anywhere else. But over here,
people are perfectly competent. They're perfectly concealing things. Like thousands
of people are collaborating inexplicably. I mean, incentivized by what, who knows,
they're collaborating to murder thousands of their neighbors, and no one is breathing a
peep about it. No one's getting caught on camera. No one's breathe the word of it to a
journalist. And so I've dealt with that style of thinking, and I know what it's like to be
in the weeds of a conversation like that. And the person will say, okay, well, but what do you
make of the fact that all those F-16s were flown 800 miles out to sea on the morning of 9-11,
doing an exercise that hadn't even been scheduled for that day. But it was, and now all of these,
I dimly recall some thesis of that kind, but I'm just making these things up now, right? So
like that detail hadn't even been scheduled for that day. It was inexplicably run that day.
So how long would it take to track that down, right? The idea that this is anomalous, like there
was an F-16 exercise run on it, and it wasn't even supposed to be run that day, right? Someone
like Alex Jones, their speech pattern is to pack as much of that stuff in as possible at the highest
velocity that a person can speak. And unless you're knocking down each one of those things,
to that audience, you appear to just be uninformed. You appear to just not be,
you know, William, he didn't know about the F-16s. He doesn't know about Project Mockingbird. You
haven't heard about Project Mockingbird? I just made up Project Mockingbird. I don't know what
it is, but that's the kind of thing that comes tumbling out in a conversation like that. That's
the kind of thing, frankly, I was worried about in the COVID conversation, because not that someone
like Brett would do it consciously, but someone like Brett is swimming in a sea of misinformation
on social, living on Twitter, getting people sending the blog post and the study from
the Philippines that showed that in this cohort, Ivermectin did X, right? And
to actually run anything to ground, you have to actually do the work journalistically and
scientifically and run it to ground, right? So for some of these questions, you actually have
to be a statistician to say, okay, they used the wrong statistics in this experiment, right? Now,
yes, we could take all the time to do that, or we could at every stage along the way,
in a context where we have experts we can trust, go with what 97% of the experts are saying about
X, about the safety of mRNA, about the transmissibility of COVID, about whether to wear
masks or not wear masks. And I completely agree that that broke down
unacceptably over the last few years. But I think that's largely a social media and blogs
and the efforts of podcasters and sub-stack writers were not just a response to that.
I think it was a symptom of that and a cause of that, right? And I think we're living in an
environment where we've basically trained ourselves not to be able to agree about facts
on any topic, no matter how urgent, right? What's flying in our sky? What's happening in Ukraine?
Is Putin just denazifying Ukraine? I mean, there are people who we respect,
who are spending time down that particular rabbit hole. Maybe there are a lot of Nazis
in Ukraine and that's the real problem, right? Maybe Putin's not the bad actor here, right?
How much time do I have to spend empathizing with Putin to the point of thinking, well,
maybe Putin's got a point and it's like, what about the polonium and the nerve agents and the
killing of journalists and the Navalny? I'm not paying so much attention to that because
I'm following all these interesting people on Twitter and they're giving me some pro-Putin
material here. And there are some Nazis in Ukraine. It's not like there are no Nazis in
Ukraine. How am I going to wait these things? I think people are being driven crazy by Twitter.
Yeah. But you're kind of speaking to conspiracy theories that pollute everything.
And then every example you gave is kind of a bad faith style of conversation.
But it's not necessarily knowingly bad faith by the people who are worried about Ukrainian
Nazis. I mean, they're some of the same people. They're the same people who are worried about
Ivermectin got suppressed. Ivermectin is really a panacea, but it got suppressed because no one
could make billions on it. It's literally, in many cases, the same people and the same
efforts to unearth those. And you're saying it's very difficult to have conversations with those
kinds of people. What about a conversation with Trump himself? Would you do a podcast with Trump?
No. I don't think so. I don't think I'd be learning anything about him. It's like with
Hitler, and I'm not comparing Trump to Hitler, but-
Clip's guy, here's your chance. You got this one.
With certain world historical figures, I would just feel like, okay, this is an opportunity
to learn something that I'm not going to learn. I think Trump is among the most superficial people
we have ever laid eyes on. He is in public view. And I'm sure there's some distance between who he
is in private and who he is in public, but it's not going to be the kind of distance that's going
to blow my mind. And I think the liability, for instance, I think Joe Rogan was very wise not
to have Trump on his podcast. I think all he would have put himself in a situation where he
couldn't adequately contain the damage Trump was doing, and he was just going to make Trump seem
cool to a potentially new cohort of his massive audience. They would have had a lot of laughs.
Trump's funny. The entertainment value of things is so influential. It was that one debate where
Trump got a massive laugh on his line, only Rosie O'Donnell. The truth is, we're living
in a political system where if you can get a big laugh during a political debate, you win.
It doesn't matter who you are. That's the level of, it doesn't matter how uninformed you are,
it doesn't matter that half the debate was about what the hell we should do about
a threat of nuclear war or anything else. We're monkeys, right? And we like to laugh.
Well, because he brought up Joe, he's somebody like you I look up to. I've learned a lot from
him because I think who he is privately as a human being. Also, he's kind of the voice of
curiosity to me. He inspired me that so unending, open-minded curiosity, much like you are the
voice of reason. They recently had a podcast, Joe had recently a podcast with Jordan Peterson,
and I brought you up saying they still have a hope for you. Any chance you talk to Joe again,
reinvigorate your friendship? I reached out to him privately when I saw that.
Did you use the power of love? Joe knows I love him and consider him a friend,
right? So there's no issue there. He also knows I'll be happy to do his podcast
when we get that together. So there's no, I have got no policy of not talking to Joe or not doing
his podcast. I think we got a little sideways along these same lines where we've talked about
Brett and Elon and other people. It was never to that degree with Joe because
Joe's in a very different lane, right? He's unconsciously so. I mean, Joe is a
stand-up comic who interviews, who just is interested in everything, interviews the
widest conceivable variety of people and just lets his interests collide with their expertise or
lack of expertise. Again, it's a super wide variety of people. He'll talk about anything
and he can always pull the ripcord saying, I don't know what the fuck I'm saying. I'm a comic.
I'm stoned. We just drank too much, right? It's very entertaining. To my eye, it's all in good
faith. I think Joe is an extraordinarily ethical, good person. Also doesn't use Twitter. Doesn't
really use Twitter. The crucial difference though is it because he is an entertainer first. I'm not
saying he's not smart and he doesn't understand things. What's potentially confusing is he's
very smart and he's also very informed. His full-time job is taught when he's not doing stand-up
or doing color commentary for the UFC. His full-time job is talking to lots of very smart people
at great lengths. He's created the Joe Rogan University for himself and he's gotten a lot of
information crammed into his head. It's not that he's uninformed, but he can always,
when he feels that he's uninformed or when it turns out he was wrong about something,
he can always pull the ripcord and say, I'm just a comic. We were stoned. It was fun.
Don't take medical advice from me. I don't play a doctor on the internet.
I can't quite do that. You can't quite do that. We're in different lanes. I'm not saying you and
I are in exactly the same lane, but for much of Joe's audience, I'm just this establishment
shill, just banging on about the universities and medical journals. It's not true,
but that would be the perception. As a counterpoint to a lot of what's being said on Joe's podcast
or certainly Brett's podcast on these topics, I can see how they would form that opinion.
In reality, if you listen to me long enough, you hear that I've said as much against the woke
nonsense as anyone, even any lunatic on the right who can only keep that bright shining object in
view. There's nothing that Candace Owens has said about wokeness that I haven't said about
wokeness in so far as she's speaking rationally about wokeness, but we have to be able to keep
multiple things in view. If you could only look at the problem of wokeness and you couldn't
acknowledge the problem of Trump and Trumpism and QAnon and the explosion of irrationality
that was happening on the right and bigotry that was happening on the right, you were just
disregarding half of the landscape. Many people took half of the problem in recent years. The last
five years is a story of many people taking half of the problem and monetizing that half of the
problem and getting captured by an audience that only wanted that half of the problem talked about
in that way. This is the larger issue of audience capture, which I'm sure it's an
ancient problem, but it's a very helpful phrase that I think comes to us courtesy of our mutual
friend Eric Weinstein. Audience capture is a thing, and I believe I've witnessed many
casualties of it. If there's anything I've been unguard against in my life professionally,
it's been that. When I noticed that I had a lot of people in my audience who didn't like my
criticizing Trump, I really leaned into it. When I noticed that a lot of the other cohort of my
audience didn't like me criticizing the far left and wokeness. I thought I was exaggerating that
problem. I leaned into it because I thought those parts of my audience were absolutely wrong,
and I didn't care about whether I was going to lose those parts of my audience. There are people
who have created, knowingly or not, there are people who've created different incentives for
themselves because of how they've monetized their podcasts and because of the kind of signal
they've responded to in their audience. Brett would consider this a totally invidious
ad hominem thing to say, but I really do worry that that's happened to Brett. I cannot explain
how you do 100 with all the things in the universe to be interested in, and of all the things he's
competent to speak intelligently about, I don't know how you do 100 podcasts in a row on COVID.
It makes no sense. You think in part audience capture can explain that?
I absolutely think it can. For example, do you feel pressure to not admit that you made a mistake
on COVID or made a mistake on Trump? I'm not saying you feel that way, but do you feel this
pressure? You've attacked audience capture within the way you do stuff, so you don't feel
as much pressure from the audience, but within your own ego.
I mean, again, the people who think I'm wrong about any of these topics are going to think,
okay, you're just not admitting that you're wrong, but now we're having a dispute about specific facts.
There are things that I believed about COVID or worried might be true about COVID two years ago
that I no longer believe or I'm not so worried about now, and vice versa. I mean,
things have flipped, certain things have flipped upside down.
The question is, was I wrong? Here's a cartoon version of it, but this is something I said
probably 18 months ago, and it's still true. When I saw what Brett was doing on COVID,
let's call it two years ago, I said, even if he's right, even if he turns out that Ivermectin
is a panacea and the mRNA vaccines kill millions of people, he's still wrong right now. His reasoning
is still flawed right now. His facts still suck right now, and his confidence is unjustified now.
That was true then, that will always be true then, and not much has changed for me to revisit
any of my time points along the way. Again, I will totally concede that if I had teenage boys
and their schools were demanding that they be vaccinated with the mRNA vaccine,
I would be powerfully annoyed. I wouldn't know what I was going to do, and I would be doing more
research about myocarditis, and I'd be badgering our doctors, and I would be worried that we have
a medical system and a pharmaceutical system and a healthcare system and a public health system
that's not incentivized to look at any of this in a fine-grained way, and they just want one
blanket admonition to the entire population, just take the shot, you idiots.
I view that largely as a result, a panicked response to the misinformation explosion that
happened and the populist resistance animated by misinformation that just made it impossible to
get anyone to cooperate. Part of it is, again, a pendulum swing in the wrong direction,
somewhat analogous to the woke response to Trump and the Trumpist response to woke.
A lot of people have just gotten pushed around for bad reasons, but understandable reasons,
but yes, there are caveats. Things have changed about my view of COVID, but the question is,
if you roll back the clock 18 months, was I wrong to want to platform Eric Topol, a very
well-respected cardiologist on this topic, or Nicholas Christakis to talk about the network
effects of whether we should close schools. He's written a book on COVID, his network
effects, or his wheelhouse, both as an MD and as a sociologist. There was a lot that we believed
we knew about the efficacy of closing schools during the Spanish flu pandemic and others,
but there's a lot we didn't know about COVID. We didn't know how negligible the effects would be
on kids compared to older people. I really enjoyed your conversation with Eric Topol,
but also didn't. He's one of the great communicators in many ways on Twitter,
like distillation of the current data. I hope I'm not overstating it, but there is a bit of an
arrogance from him that I think could be explained by him being exhausted, by being constantly attacked
by conspiracy theories, like anti-vaxxers. To me, the same thing happens with people that
start drifting to being right-wing is to get attacked so much by the left, they become almost
irrational and arrogant in their beliefs. I felt your conversation with Eric Topol did not
sufficiently empathize with people that have skepticism, but also did not sufficiently
communicate uncertainty we have. Many of the decisions you made, many of the things you were
talking about, we're saying there's a lot of uncertainty, but this is the best thing we could
do now. Well, it was a forced choice. You're going to get COVID. Do you want to be vaccinated when
you get it? That was always, in my view, an easy choice. Up until you start breaking apart the
cohorts and you start saying, okay, wait a minute, there is this myocarditis issue in young men.
Let's talk about that. Before that story emerged, it was just clear that
this is, if it's not knocking down transmission as much as we had hoped, it is still mitigating
severe illness and death. I still believe that it is the current view of most people competent to
analyze the data, that we lost something like 300,000 people unnecessarily in the US
vaccine hesitancy. I think there's a way to communicate with humility about the uncertainty
of things that would increase the vaccination rate. I do believe that it is rational and
sometimes effective to signal impatience with certain bad ideas and certain conspiracy theories
and certain forms of misinformation. I just think it makes you look like a douchebag most times.
Certain people are persuadable, certain people are not persuadable, but it's the opportunity
cost. Not everything can be given a patient hearing. You can't have a physics conference
and then let people in to just trumpet their pet theories about the grand unified vision of physics
when they're obviously crazy or when they're obviously half crazy. You begin to get a sense for
this when it is your wheelhouse, but there are people who declare their
irrelevance to the conversation fairly quickly without knowing that they have done it.
The truth is, I think I'm one of those people on the topic of COVID. It's never that I felt,
I know exactly what's going on here. I know these mRNA vaccines are safe. I know exactly how to run
a lockdown. This is a situation where you want the actual pilots to fly the plane. We needed
experts who we could trust. Insofar as our experts got captured by all manner of things,
some of them got captured by Trump. Some of them were made to look ridiculous just standing next
to Trump while he was bloviating about whatever. It's just going to go away. There's just 15 people
in a cruise ship and it's just going to go away. There's going to be no problem.
Many of these doctors think, I understand this better than them. They're just amazed at how I
understand this. You've got doctors, real doctors, the heads of the CDC and NIH standing
around just ashen-faced while he's talking. All of this was deeply corrupting of the public
communication of science. Again, I've banged on about the depredations of wokeness. The
woke thing was a disaster. It still is a disaster. The thing is, there's a big difference between
me and Brett in this case. I didn't do 100 podcasts on COVID. I did two podcasts on COVID.
The measure of my concern about COVID can be measured in how many podcasts I did on it.
Once we had a sense of how to live with COVID, I was just living with COVID, like,
okay, if you get vaxed or don't get vaxed, wear a mask or don't wear a mask. Travel or don't travel.
You've got a few things to decide, but my kids were stuck at home on iPads for too long. I
didn't agree with that. It was obviously not functional. I criticized that on the margins,
but there was not much to do about it. The thing I didn't do is make this my life and just
browbeat people with one message or another. We need a public health regime where we can trust
what the competent people are saying to us about what medicines are safe to take. Even in the
presence of that craziness is going to proliferate given the tools we've built, but in the absence
of that, it's going to proliferate for understandable reasons. It's not going to be good
next time when something orders of magnitude more dangerous hits us. In so far as I think about
this issue, I think much more about next time than this time. Before this COVID thing, you and
Brad had some good conversations. I would say we're friends. What do you admire most about
Brad outside of all the criticism we've had about this COVID topic?
I think Brad is very smart and he's a very ethical person who wants good things for the
world. I have no reason to doubt that. The fact that we're cross-wise on this issue does not mean
that I think he's a bad person. The thing that worried me about what he was doing,
and this was true of Joe, and this was true of Elon, this is true of many other people,
is that once you're messaging at scale to a vast audience, you incur a certain kind of
responsibility not to get people killed. I did worry that people were making decisions on the
basis of the information that was getting shared there. That's why I was, I think,
fairly circumspect. I just said, okay, give me the center of the fairway expert opinion
at this time point, and at this time point, and at this time point, and then I'm out. I don't
have any more to say about this. I'm not an expert on COVID. I'm not an expert on the safety of mRNA
vaccines. If something changes so as to become newsworthy, then maybe I'll do a podcast. I just
did a podcast on the lab leak. I was never skeptical of the lab leak hypothesis. Brett
was very early on saying, this is a lab leak at a point where my only position was, who cares
if it's a lab leak? The thing we have to get straight is, what do we do given the nature
of this pandemic? But also, we should say that you've actually stated that it is a possibility.
You just said it doesn't quite matter. The time to figure that out, now, I've actually,
I have had my podcast guest on this topic changed my view of this because one of the guests,
Alina Chan, made the point that actually the best time to figure out the origin of this is
immediately, because in the event you lose touch with the evidence, and I hadn't really
been thinking about that. If you come back after a year, there are certain facts you might not be
able to get in hand. But I've always felt that it didn't matter for two reasons. One is we had the
genome of the virus and we could design, we're very quickly designed, immediately designing
vaccines against that genome, and that's what we had to do. And then we had to figure out how to
vaccinate and to mitigate and to develop treatments and all of that.
So the origin story didn't matter. Generically speaking, either origin story was politically
inflammatory and made the Chinese look bad. And the Chinese response to this looked bad,
whatever the origin story, right? They're not cooperating. They're stopping their domestic
flights but letting their international flights go. They were bad actors and they should be treated
as such regardless of the origin. And I would argue that the wet market origin is even more
politically invidious than the lab leak origin. Because to my eye, the lab leak could happen
to anyone. All these advanced countries are running these dangerous labs. That's a practice
that we should be worried about in general. We know lab leaks are a problem. There have been
multiple lab leaks of even worse things that haven't gotten out of hand in this way but
worse pathogens. We're wise to be worried about this and on some level, it could happen to anyone.
The wet market makes them look like barbarians within another century. You've got to clean
up those wet markets. What are you doing putting a bat on top of a pangolin, on top of a duck?
Get your shit together. If anything, the wet market makes them look worse in my view. Now,
I'm sure that what they actually did to conceal a lab leak, if it was a lab leak,
all of that's going to look odious. Do you think we'll ever get to the bottom of that?
One of the big negative, I would say failures of Anthony Fauci and so on is to be transparent and
clear and it's just a good communicator about gain and function research, the dangers of that.
Why it's a useful way of research but it's also dangerous just being transparent about that as
opposed to just coming off really shady. Of course, the conspiracy theorists and the politicians are
not helping but this just created a giant mess. I would agree that that exchange with Fauci and
Rand Paul that went viral, I would agree that Fauci looked like he was taking refuge in very
lawyered language and not giving a straightforward account of what we do and why we do it.
So, yeah, I think it looked shady, it played shady and it probably was shady. I don't know
how personally entangled he is with any of this but the gain of function research is something that
I think we're wise to be worried about and so far as I judge myself adequate to have an opinion on
this, I think it should be banned. Probably a podcast I'll do if you or somebody else doesn't
do it in the meantime, I would like a virologist to defend it against a virologist who would
criticize it. Forget about just the gain of function research. I don't even understand
virus hunting at this point. It's like, I don't even know why you need to go into a cave to find
this next virus that could be circulating among bats that may jump zoonotically to us.
Why do that when we can sequence in a day and make vaccines in a weekend?
What kind of head start do you think you're getting?
That's a surprising new thing, how quickly you can develop a vaccine.
Exactly. Yeah, that's really interesting but the shagginess around lab leak.
I think the point I didn't make about Brett's style of engaging this issue is people are using
the fact that he was early on lab leak to suggest that he was right about ivermectin and about mRNA
vaccines and all the rest. None of that connects and it was possible to be falsely confident.
You shouldn't have been confident about lab. No one should have been confident about lab leak
early even if it turns out to be lab leak. It was always plausible. It was never definite.
It still isn't definite. Zoonotic is also quite plausible. It certainly was super plausible then.
Both are politically uncomfortable. Both at the time were inflammatory to be banging on about
when we were trying to secure some kind of cooperation from the Chinese.
There's a time for these things and it's possible to be right by accident.
The style of reasoning matters whether you're right or not because your style of reasoning
is dictating what you're going to do on the next topic.
Sure, but this is a this multi-various situation here. It's really difficult to
know what's right on COVID given all the uncertainty, all the chaos, especially when you step outside
the pure biology, virology of it and you start to get into policy. It's really, yeah, it's just
trade-offs. Like transmissibility of the virus. Just knowing if 65% of the population gets
vaccinated, what effect would that have? Just even knowing those things, just modeling all those
things. Given all the other incentives, I mean Pfizer, I don't know what to think.
You hadn't had the CEO of Pfizer on your podcast. Did you leave that conversation feeling like
this is a person who is consciously
reaping windfall profits on a dangerous vaccine and putting everyone at intolerable risk?
Or did you think this person was making a good faith attempt to save lives
and had no taint of bad incentives or something between them?
The thing I sensed and I felt in part, it was a failure on my part,
but I sensed that I was talking to a politician. So it's not thinking of there was malevolence
there or benevolence. He just had a job. He put on a suit and I was talking to a suit,
not a human being. Now he said that his son was a big fan of the podcast, which is why he
wanted to do it. So I thought I would be talking to a human being. And I asked challenging questions
where I thought the internet thinks otherwise. Every single question in that interview was a
challenging one, but it wasn't grilling, which is what people seem to want to
do with pharmaceutical companies. There's a deep distress of pharmaceutical companies.
What's the alternative? I totally get that windfall profits at a time of public health
emergency looks bad. It is a bad look, but how do we reward and return capital to risk takers
who will spend a billion dollars to design a new drug for a disease that maybe only
harms a single digit percentage of the population? What do we want to encourage?
Who do we want to get rich? The person who cures cancer, do we want that person to get rich or
not? We want the person who gave us the iPhone to get rich, but we don't want the person who
cures cancer to get rich. What are we trying to do?
I think it's a very gray area. So what we want is the person who declares that they have a cure
for cancer to have authenticity and transparency. I think we're good now as a population smelling
bullshit. And there is something about the Pfizer CEO, for example, just CEO of the pharmaceutical
companies in general, just because they're so lured up, so much marketing PR people,
that you just smell bullshit. You're not talking a real human. It just feels like
none of it is transparent to us as a public. So this whole talking point that Pfizer's only
interested in helping people just doesn't ring true, even though it very well could be true.
It's the same thing with Bill Gates, who seems to be at scale helping a huge amount of people in
the world. And yet there's something about the way he delivers that message, where people like,
this seems suspicious. What's happening underneath this? There's certain kinds of
communication styles that seem to be more serve as better catalysts for conspiracy theories.
And I'm not sure what that is, because I don't think there's an alternative
for capitalism in delivering drugs that help people. But also at the same time,
there seems to need to be a more transparency. And plus regulation, that actually makes sense,
it seems like pharmaceutical companies are susceptible to corruption.
Yeah, I worry about all that. But I also do think that most of the people go into those
fields and most of the people going into government are doing it for good. And they're
non-psycopaths trying to get good things done and trying to solve hard problems. And they're
not trying to get rich. I mean, many of the people are, it's like, bad incentives or something.
Again, I've uttered that phrase 30 times on this podcast, but it's just almost everywhere it explains
normal people creating terrible harm. It's not that there are that many bad people.
Yes, it makes the truly bad people that much more remarkable and worth paying attention to. But
the bad incentives and the power of bad ideas do much more harm. Because that's what gets
good people running in the wrong direction or doing things that are clearly creating unnecessary
suffering. You've had and I hope still have a friendship with Elon Musk, especially over the
topic of AI. You have a lot of interesting ideas that you both share, concerns that you both share.
Well, let me first ask, what do you admire most about Elon?
Well, I had a lot of fun with Elon. I like Elon a lot. I mean, Elon, I knew as a friend,
I like a lot. It's not going to surprise anyone. He's done and he's continuing to do amazing
things. I think many of his aspirations are realized, the world will be a much better place.
I think it's just amazing to see what he's built and what he's attempted to build and what he may
yet build. Tesla with SpaceX? Yeah, I'm a fan of almost all of that. I mean, there are wrinkles
to a lot of that or some of that. All humans are full of wrinkles.
There's something very Trumpian about how he's acting on Twitter. I mean, Twitter,
I think Twitter, he thinks Twitter is great. He bought the place because he thinks it's so great.
I think Twitter is driving him crazy. I think he's needlessly complicating his life and
harming his reputation and creating a lot of noise and harming a lot of other people.
The thing that I objected to with him on Twitter is not that he bought it and made changes to it.
Again, I remain agnostic as to whether or not he can improve the platform.
It was how he was personally behaving on Twitter, not just toward me, but toward the world.
I think when you forward an article about Nancy Pelosi's husband being attacked, not as he was
by some lunatic, but that it's just some gay, trist gone awry. That's not what it seems. You
link to a website that previously claimed that Hillary Clinton was dead and that a body double
was campaigning in her place. That thing was exploding in Trumpistan as a conspiracy theory.
It was having its effect. It matters that he was signal boosting it in front of 130 million
people. It is with saying that your former employee, Yoel Roth, is a pedophile. It's like,
that has real consequences. It appeared to be complete bullshit and now this guy's getting
inundated with death threats. Elon, that's all that's totally predictable. He's behaving quite
recklessly. There's a long list of things like that that he's done on Twitter. It's not ethical.
It's not good for him. It's not good for the world. It's not serious. It's a very adolescent
relationship to real problems in our society. My problem with how he's behaved is that he's
purported to touch real issues by turns like, okay, do I give the satellites to Ukraine or not?
Do I minimize their use of them or not? Should I publicly worry about World War III or not?
He's doing this shit on Twitter. At the same moment, he's doing these other very
impulsive, ill-considered things and he's not showing any willingness to really clean up the
mess he makes. He brings Kanye on knowing he's an anti-Semite who's got mental health problems
and then kicks him off for a swastika, which I probably wouldn't have kicked him off for
a swastika. Can you really kick people off for swastikas? Are you a free speech absolutist if
you can't let a swastika show up? I'm not even sure that's enforceable in terms of service.
There are moments to use swastikas that are not conveying hate and not raising the risk of violence.
Clip that.
But so much of what he's doing, given that he's, again, scale matters. He's doing this in front
of 130 million people. That's very different than a million people and that's very different
than 100,000 people. When I went off the tracks with Elon, he was doing this about COVID.
Again, this was a situation where I tried to privately mitigate a friend's behavior
and it didn't work out very well. Did you try to correct him highlighting things he might be wrong
on or did you use the Lex Power Love method? I should write like a pamphlet for Sam Harris.
Well, no, but it was totally coming from a place of love because I was concerned about
his reputation. I was concerned about what he, I mean, there was a two-fold concern.
I could see what was happening with the tweet. I mean, he had this original tweet that was,
I think it was panic over COVID is dumb or something like that. This is, boy, this is in March,
this is early March, 2020. Oh, super early days.
Super early. When nobody knew anything, but we knew we saw what was happening in Italy,
right? It was totally kicking off. God, that was a wild time. That's when the toilet paper.
It was totally wild, but that became the most influential tweet on Twitter for that week.
I mean, it had more engagement than any other tweet, more than any crazy thing Trump was tweeting.
It went off, again, it was just a nuclear bomb of information. I could see that people were
responding to it like, wait a minute, okay, here's this genius technologist who must have
inside information about everything, right? Surely he knows something that is not on the
surface about this pandemic. They were reading into it a lot of information that I knew wasn't
there, right? At the time, I didn't even, I didn't think he had any reason to be
suggesting that. I think he was just firing off a tweet, right?
So I reached out to him in private, and I mean, because it was a private
text conversation, I won't talk about the details, but I'm just saying that's a case,
you know, among the many cases of friends who have public platforms and who did something that
I thought was dangerous and ill-considered. This was a case where I reached out in private
and tried to help, genuinely help, because it was just, I thought it was harmful and in every
sense, because it was being misinterpreted, and it was like, okay, you can say that panic over
anything is dumb, fine, but this was not how this was landing. This was like non-issue, conspiracy,
there's going to be no COVID in the US. It's going to peter out. It's just going to become
a cold. I mean, that's how this was getting received. Whereas at that moment, it was absolutely
obvious how big a deal this was going to be, or that it was going to, at minimum, going to be a
big deal. I don't know if it was obvious, but it was obvious that it was a significant probability
that it could be a big deal. I remember in March, it wasn't unclear, like, how big, because there
were still stories of it, like it's probably going to like the big concern, the hospitals might
overfill, but it's going to stay out in like two months or something.
Yeah, we didn't know, but there was no way we weren't going to have
tens of thousands of deaths at a minimum at that point. It was totally rational to be worried
about hundreds of thousands. And when Nicholas Christakis came on my podcast very early,
he predicted quite confidently that we would have about a million people dead in the US.
And that didn't seem, I think, appropriately hedged, but I mean, it was still just like,
okay, it's just going to, you just look at the, we're just kind of riding this exponential and
it's going to be, it'd be very surprising not to have that order of magnitude and not something
much less. And so anyway, I mean, again, to close the story on Elon,
I could see how this was being received and I tried to get him to walk that back. And then we
had a fairly long and detailed exchange on this issue. And that, so that intervention
didn't work. And it was not done, I was not an asshole, I was not, I was just concerned
for him, for the world, and then there are other relationships where
I didn't take the, but again, that's an example where taking the time didn't work,
right, privately. There are other relationships where I thought, okay,
this is just going to be more trouble than it's worth. And I said, I just ignored it. And
there's a lot of that. And frankly, again, I'm not comfortable with how this is all netted out,
because I don't know if, frankly, I'm not comfortable with how much time in this conversation
we've spent talking about these specific people. Like what good is it for me to talk about Elon
or bread or anything? I think there's a lot of good because those friendships, listen, as a fan,
these are the conversations I loved, love as a fan. And it feels like COVID has robbed the
world of these conversations. Because you are exchanging back and forth on Twitter. But that's
not what I mean by conversations, like long form discussions, like a debate about COVID,
like a normal debate. But there's no, there is no, Elon and I shouldn't be debating COVID.
You should be. Here's the thing with humility, like basically saying, we don't really know,
like the Rogan method, we don't, we're just a bunch of idiots. Like one is an engineer,
you're a neuroscientist, but like, it just kind of, okay, here's the evidence and be like normal
people. That's what everybody was doing. The whole world was like trying to figure out what the hell,
what? Yeah, but the issue was that at that, so at the moment I had this collision with Elon,
certain things were not debatable, right? It was just, it was absolutely clear where this was going.
It wasn't clear how far it was going to go or how quickly we would mitigate it, but
it was absolutely clear that it was going to be an issue, right? The train had come off the
tracks in Italy. We knew we weren't going to seal our borders. There were already people,
you know, there are already cases known to many of us personally in the U.S. at that point,
and he was operating by a very different logic that I couldn't engage with.
Sure, but that logic represents a part of the population and there's a lot of interesting
topics that have a lot of uncertainty around them, like the effectiveness of masks, like-
Yeah, but no, but where things broke down was not at the point of, oh, there's a lot to talk
about, a lot to debate, this is all very interesting, and who knows what's what. It broke down very
early at this is, you know, there's nothing to talk about here, like either there's a water bottle
on the table or there isn't, right? Well, technically, there's only one fourth of a water
bottle. So what defines a water bottle? Is it the water inside the water bottle? Is it the water
bottle? Well, I'm giving you as an example of it's worth a conversation.
This is difficult because we had an exchange in private and I want to honor not exposing
the details of it, but, you know, the details convinced me that there was not a follow-up
conversation on that topic. On this topic. That said, I hope, and I hope to be part of helping
that happen, that the friendship is rekindled because one of the topics I care a lot about,
artificial intelligence, you've had great public and private conversations about this topic.
Yeah, and Elon was very formative in my taking that issue seriously. I mean, he and I went to
that initial conference in Puerto Rico together and it was only because he was going and I found
out about it through him and I just wrote his coattails to it, you know, that I got to
dropped in that side of the pool to hear about these concerns at that point.
It would be interesting to hear how has your concern evolved with the coming out of ChadGPT
and these new large language models that are fine-tuned with reinforcement learning and
seemingly to be able to do some incredible human-like things. There's two questions. One,
how is your concern in terms of AGI and superintelligence evolved and how impressed are you
with ChadGPT as a student of the human mind and mind in general?
Well, my concern about AGI is unchanged. I've spoken about it a bunch on my podcast,
but I did a TED talk in 2016, which was the kind of summary of what that conference and
various conversations I had after that did to my brain on this topic.
Basically, once superintelligence is achieved, there's a take-off. It becomes exponentially
smarter and in a matter of time, they're just where ants and they're gods.
Yeah, unless we find some way of permanently tethering a superintelligent,
superintelligent self-improving AI to our value system. I don't believe anyone has figured out
how to do that or whether that's even possible in principle. I know people like Stuart Russell,
who I just had on my podcast, are trying- Oh, really? Have you released it?
I haven't released it yet. He's been on previous podcasts, but we just recorded this week.
Because you haven't done an AI podcast in a while, so it's great. He's a good person to
talk about alignment with. Yeah, so Stuart has been probably more than anyone,
my guru on this topic. I mean, you're just reading his book and doing, I think I've done
two podcasts with him at this point. I think it's called The Control Problem or something like that.
His book is Human Compatible.
Yeah, he talks about the control problem. Yeah, so I just think the idea that we can
define a value function in advance that permanently tethers a self-improving
superintelligent AI to our values as we continue to discover them, refine them,
extrapolate them in an open-ended way, I think that's a tall order. I think
there are many more ways, there must be many more ways of designing superintelligence that
is not aligned in that way and is not ever approximating our values in that way. So Stuart's
idea to put it in a very simple way is that he thinks you don't want to specify the value
function up front. You don't want to imagine you could ever write the code in such a way as to
admit of no loophole. You want to make the AI uncertain as to what human values are and perpetually
uncertain and always trying to ameliorate that uncertainty by hewing more and more closely
to what our professed values are. So it's always interested in saying, oh, no, no, that's not what
we want. That's not what we intend. Stop doing that. No matter how smart it gets, all it wants
to do is more perfectly approximate human values. I think there are a lot of problems with that at
a high level. I'm not a computer scientist, so I'm sure there are many problems at a low level
that I don't understand. Like how to force a human into the loop always, no matter what.
There's that and what humans get a vote and what do humans value and what is the difference between
what we say we value and our revealed preferences. If you were a super intelligent AI that could
look at humanity now, I think you could be forgiven for concluding that what we value is
driving ourselves crazy with Twitter and living perpetually on the brink of nuclear war and just
watching hot girls and yoga pants on TikTok again and again and again.
You're saying that is not? This is all revealed preference and it's what is an AI to make of
that and what should it optimize? So part of this is also Stuart's observation that
one of the insidious things about the YouTube algorithm is it's not that it just caters
to our preferences. It actually begins to change us in ways so as to make us more predictable.
If I could find ways to make us a better reporter of our preferences and to trim our
preferences down so that it can further train to that signal. So the main concern is that
most of the people in the field seem not to be taking intelligence seriously.
So as they design more and more intelligent machines and as they profess to want to design
true AGI, they're not spending the time that Stuart is spending trying to figure out how to
do this safely above all. They're just assuming that these problems are going to solve themselves
as we make that final stride into the end zone or they're saying very
polyanish things like an AI would never form a motive to harm human. Why would it ever form a
motive to be malicious toward humanity unless we put that motive in there? That's not the concern.
The concern is that in the presence of vast disparities and competence and in certainly
in a condition where the machines are improving themselves, they're improving their own code,
they could be developing instrumental goals that are antithetical to our well-being
without any intent to harm us. It's analogous to what we do to every other species on Earth.
You and I don't consciously form the intention to harm insects on a daily basis, but there are many
things we could intend to do that would in fact harm insects because you decide to repave your
driveway or whatever you're doing. You're just not taking the interest of insects into account
because they're so far beneath you in terms of your cognitive horizons.
The real challenge here is that if you believe that intelligence scales up on a continuum
toward heights that we can only dimly imagine. I think there's every reason to believe that.
There's no reason to believe that we're near the summit of intelligence.
Maybe there are some forms of intelligence for which this is not true, but for many
relevant forms, like the top 100 things we care about cognitively, I think there's every reason
to believe that many of those things, most of those things, are a lot like chess or go,
where once the machines get better than we are, they're going to stay better than we are, although
I don't know if you caught the recent thing with Go where this guy actually came out of
Stewart's lab. One time a human beta machine.
They found a hack for that. But anyway, ultimately, there's going to be no looking back. And then
the question is, what do we do in relationship to these systems that are more competent than we
are in every relevant respect? Because it will be a relationship. The people who think we're just
going to figure this all out without thinking about it in advance, the solutions are just going to
find themselves, seem not to be taking the prospect of really creating autonomous super
intelligence seriously. What does that mean? It's every bit as independent and
ungovernable, ultimately, as us having created, I mean, just imagine if we created a race of people
that were 10 times smarter than all of us. How would we live with those people? They're 10 times
smarter than us, right? They begin to talk about things we don't understand. They begin to want
things we don't understand. They begin to view us as obstacles to them, to their solving those
problems or gratifying those desires. We become the chickens or the monkeys in their presence.
And I think that it's, but for some amazing solution of the sort that Stuart is imagining,
that we could somehow anchor their reward function permanently, no matter how intelligent scales.
I think it's really worth worrying about this. I do buy the sci-fi notion that this is an
existential risk if we don't do it well. I worry that we don't notice it. I'm deeply impressed
with Chad GPT and I'm worried that it will become super intelligent. These language models will
become super intelligent because they're basically trained in the collective intelligence of the
human species and then it will start controlling our behavior if they're integrated into our algorithms,
the recommender systems. And then we just won't notice that there's a super intelligent system
that's controlling our behavior. Well, I think that's true even before, far before super intelligence,
even before general intelligence. I mean, I think just the narrow intelligence of these algorithms
and of what something like Chad GPT can do, I mean, it's just far short of it developing its own
goals and that are at cross purposes with ours. Just the unintended consequences of
using it in the ways we're going to be incentivized to use it and the money to be made from scaling
this thing and what it does to our information space and our sense of just being able to get
to ground truth on any facts, it's super scary. Do you think it's a giant leap in terms of the
development towards AGI, Chad GPT, or is it just an impressive little toolbox? So when do you think
the singularity is coming? Or is it T? It doesn't matter. I have no intuitions on that front,
apart from the fact that if we continue to make progress, it will come. You just have to assume
we continue to make progress. There's only two assumptions. You have to assume
substrate independence. So there's no reason why this can't be done in silico. We can build
arbitrarily intelligent machines. There's nothing magical about having this done in the wet wear
of our own brains. I think that is true and I think that's scientifically parsimonious to think
that that's true. Then you just have to assume we're going to keep making progress. It doesn't
have to be any special rate of progress. It doesn't have to be Moore's law. It can just be,
we just keep going. At a certain point, we're going to be in relationship to minds leaving
consciousness aside. I don't have any reason to believe that they'll necessarily be conscious by
virtue of being super intelligent and that's its own interesting ethical question. But
leaving consciousness aside, they're going to be more competent than we are. Then that's like
the aliens have landed. That's an encounter with, again, leaving aside the possibility that
something like Stewart's path is actually available to us. But it is hard to picture
if what we mean by intelligence, all things considered and it's truly general,
if that scales and begins to build upon itself, how you maintain that perfect slavish devotion
until the end of time in those systems. The tether to humans?
I think my gut says that there's a lot of ways to do it. It's not this increasingly impossible
problem. I'm not a computer scientist. I have no intuitions about his algorithmically
how you would approach that and what's possible. My main intuitions is maybe deeply flawed, but the
main intuition is based on the fact that most of the learning is currently happening on human
knowledge. So even chat GPT is just trained on human data. I don't see where the takeoff happens
where you completely go above human wisdom. The current impressive aspect of chat GPT is that's
using collective intelligence of all of us. From what I glean, again, from people who know much
more about this than I do, I think we have reason to be skeptical that these techniques of deep
learning are actually going to be sufficient to push us into AGI. They're not generalizing in the
way they need to. They're certainly not learning like human children. There's brittle and strange
ways. It's not to say that the human path is the only path. Maybe we might learn better lessons
by ignoring the way brains work, but we know that they don't generalize and use abstraction the way
we do. They have strange holes in their competence. But the size of the holes is shrinking every time.
That's so the intuition starts to slowly fall apart. The intuition is surely can't be this simple
to achieve intelligence. It's becoming simpler and simpler. The progress is quite incredible.
I've been extremely impressed with chat GPT and the new models, and there's a lot of financial
incentive to make progress in this regard. We're going to be living through some very interesting
times. In raising a question that I'm going to be talking to you, a lot of people brought up this
topic probably because Eric Weinstein talked to Joe Rogan recently and said that he and you were
contacted by folks about UFOs. Can you clarify the nature of this contact? I've got very little
to say on this. He has much more to say. I think he went down this rabbit hole further than
I did, which wouldn't surprise anyone. He's got much more of a taste for this sort of thing than
I do, but I think we're contacted by the same person. It wasn't clear to me who this person was
or how this person got that my cell phone number. It didn't seem like we were getting
punked. I mean, the person seemed credible to me. Then we're talking to you about the release of
different videos on UFOs. Yeah. This is when there was a flurry of activity around this. There
was a big New Yorker article on UFOs and there was rumors of congressional hearings, I think,
come in and the videos that were being debunked or not. This person contacted both of us, I think,
around the same time. I think he might have contacted Rogan or other. Eric is just the only
person I've spoken to about it, I think, who I know was contacted. What happened is the person
kept writing a check that he didn't cash. He kept saying, okay, next week, I understand this is
sounding spooky and you have no reason to really trust me, but next week I'm going to put you on
a Zoom call with people who you will recognize and they're going to be former heads of the CIA.
Within five seconds of being on the Zoom call, you'll know this is not a hoax. I said, great,
just send me the Zoom link. That happened maybe three times. There was just one phone conversation
and then it was just texts. There's just a bunch of texts. I think Eric spent more time with this
person and I haven't spoken to him about it. I know he's spoken about it publicly. It's not
that my bullshit detector ever really went off in a big way, it's just the thing never happened.
I lost interest. You made a comment which is interesting, which I really appreciate.
You ran a thought experiment of saying, okay, maybe we do have alien spacecraft,
or just a thought experiment that aliens did visit, and then this very kind of nihilistic,
sad thought that it wouldn't matter. It wouldn't affect your life. Can you explain that?
I think many people noticed this. This was a sign of how crazy the news cycle was at that
point. We had COVID, we had Trump, and I forget when the UFO thing was really kicking off, but
it just seemed like no one had the bandwidth to even be interested in this. I was amazed to
notice in myself that I wasn't more interested in figuring out what was going on. I considered,
wait a minute. If this is true, this is the biggest story in anyone's lifetime. I mean,
contact with alien intelligence is by definition the biggest story in anyone's lifetime in human
history. Why isn't this just totally captivating? Not only was it not totally captivating,
it was just barely rising to the level of my being able to pay attention to it.
One, to some degree, an understandable defense mechanism against the bogus claims that have
been made about this kind of thing in the past. The general sense is probably bullshit,
it probably has some explanation that is purely terrestrial and not surprising.
And there is somebody who, what's his name? Is it Mick West? I forget, is it a YouTuber?
Yeah, Mick West, yeah. He debunked stuff.
Yeah, I mean, I have since seen some of those videos. Now this is going back still at least
a year, but some of those videos seem like fairly credible debunkings of some of the optical evidence.
And I'm surprised we haven't seen more of that. There was a fairly credulous 60 minutes piece
that came out around that time looking at some of that video, and it was the very video that he
was debunking on YouTube, and his video only had like 50,000 views on it or whatever.
But again, it seemed like a fairly credible debunking. I haven't seen debunkings of his
debunkings, but- I think there is, but he's basically saying that there is
there is possible explanations for it. Right.
And usually in these kinds of contexts, if there's a possible explanation,
even if it seems unlikely, it's going to be more likely than an alien civilization visiting us.
Yeah, it's the extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence principle,
which I think is generally true.
Well, with aliens, I think generally, I think there should be some humility about
what they would look like when they show up. I tend to think they're already here.
The amazing thing about this AI conversation, though, is that we're talking about a circumstance
where we would be designing the aliens, and there's every reason to believe that
eventually this is going to happen. I'm not at all skeptical about the coming reality
of the aliens, that we're going to build them.
Now, here's the thing. Does this apply to when superintelligence shows up?
Will this be trending on Twitter for a day, and then we'll go on to complain about
something Sam Harris once again said in his podcast the next day?
You tend to trend on Twitter, even though you're not on Twitter, which is great.
Yeah, I haven't noticed. I did notice when I was on, but-
Do you have this concern about AGI, basically, the same kind of thing that we would just
look the other way? Is there something about this time where even like World War III,
which has been throwing around very casually, concerningly so, even that the new cycle wipes
that away? Yeah. Well, I think we have this general problem that we can't make
certain information, even unequivocally certain information, emotionally salient.
We respond quite readily to certain things. As we talked about, we respond to the
little girl who fell down a well. That gets 100% of our emotional resources, but
the abstract probability of nuclear war, even a high probability, even an intolerable
probability, even if we put it at 30%. That's Russian roulette with a gun with three chambers,
and it's aimed at the heads, not only your head, but your kid's head and everyone's kid's head,
and it's just 24 hours a day. I think people who, this pre-Ukraine, I think the people who have
made it their business to professionally to think about the risk of nuclear war and to
mitigate it, people like Graham Allison or William Perry. I think they were putting the
ongoing risk, the risk that we're going to have a proper nuclear war at some point in the next
generation, people were putting it at something like 50%. They were living with this sort of
Damocles over our heads. Now, you might wonder whether anyone could have reliable intuitions
about the probability of that kind of thing, but the status quo is truly alarming. We've got
we've got ICBMs on the leaf side, smaller exchanges and tactical nukes and how we could
have a world war based on incremental changes. We've got the biggest bombs aimed at the biggest
cities in both directions, and it's old technology. It's vulnerable to some lunatic
deciding to launch or misreading bad data, and we know we've been saved from nuclear war
I think at least twice by Soviet submarine commanders deciding, I'm not going to pass
this up the chain of command. This is almost certainly an error, and it turns out it was an
error. We need people to, in that particular case, he saw, I think it was five what seemed
like five missiles launched from the US to Russia, and he reasoned if America was going to engage
in a first strike, they'd launched more than five missiles. This has to be fictional,
and then he waited long enough to decide that it was fictional. The probability of a nuclear war
happening by mistake or some other species of inadvertence, misunderstanding,
technical malfunction, that's intolerable. Forget about the intentional use of it by
people who are driven crazy by some ideology. More and more technologies are unable to kind
of scale destruction. Misinformation plays into this picture in a way that is especially
scary. Once you can get a deep fake of any current president of the United States claiming to have
launched a first strike and just send that everywhere. They could change the nature of truth,
and then that might change the engine we have for skepticism is sharpening it,
the more you have deep fakes. We might have AI and digital watermarks that help us. Maybe we'll
not trust any information that hasn't come through specific channels. In my world,
I no longer feel the need to respond to anything other than what I put out in my channels of
information. There are so many people who have clipped stuff of me that shows the opposite of
what I was actually saying in context. The people who have re-edited my podcast audio to make it
seem like I said the opposite of what I was saying. Unless I put it out, you can't be sure
that I actually said it. But I don't know what it's like to live like that for all forms of
information. Strangely, I think it may require a greater siloing of information in the end.
We're living through this wild west period where everyone's got a newsletter and everyone's got a
blog and everyone's got an opinion. But once you can fake everything.
There might be a greater value for expertise for experts, but a more rigorous system for
identifying who the experts are. Yeah, or just knowing that it's going to be an arms race to
authenticate information. So it's like, if you can never trust a photograph unless it has been
vetted by Getty Images because only Getty Images has the resources to authenticate the provenance
of that photograph and a test that hasn't been meddled with by AI. And again, I don't even know
if that's technically possible. And maybe whatever the tools available for this will be commodified
and the cost will be driven to zero so quickly that everyone will be able to do it. It could be
like encryption. And it will be proven and tested most effectively first, of course, as always in
porn, which is where most of human innovation technology happens first. Well, I have to ask
because Ron Howard, the director asked us on Twitter, since we're talking about the threat
of nuclear war and otherwise, he asked, I'd be interested in both your expectations for human
society if when we move beyond Mars, will those societies be industrial based? How will it be
governed? How will criminal infractions be dealt with when you read or watch sci-fi what comes
closest to sounding logical? Do you think about our society beyond Earth? If we call it as Mars,
if we call it as space? Yeah, well, I think I have a pretty humbling picture of that. I mean,
because we're still going to be the apes that we are. So when you imagine colonizing Mars,
you have to imagine a first fistfight on Mars. You have to imagine a first murder on Mars.
Also infidelity? Yeah, extramarital affairs on Mars. So it's going to get
really homely and boring really fast, I think. It's like only the spacesuits or the other
exigencies of just living in that atmosphere or lack thereof will limit how badly we can behave on Mars.
But do you think most of the interaction will be still in meat space versus digital? Do you think
there'll be, do you think we're like living through a transformation of a kind where we're
going to be doing more and more interaction than digital space? Like everything we've been complaining
about Twitter, is it possible that Twitter is just the early days of a broken system that's
actually giving birth to a better working system that's ultimately digital?
I think we're going to experience a pendulum swing back into the real world. I mean, I think
many of us are experiencing that now anyway. I mean, just wanting to have face-to-face encounters
and spend less time on our phones and less time online. I think maybe everyone isn't going in that
direction, but I do notice it myself and I notice, I mean, once I got off Twitter,
then I noticed the people who were never on Twitter, right? And the people who were never,
basically, I mean, I know I have a lot of friends who were never on Twitter.
And they actually never understood what I was doing on Twitter. It wasn't that they were seeing it
and then reacting to it, they just didn't know. It's like I'm not on Reddit either,
but I don't spend any time thinking about not being on Reddit. It's like I'm just not on Reddit.
Do you think the pursuit of human happiness is better achieved and more effectively achieved
outside of Twitter world? Well, I think all we have is our attention in the end,
and we just have to notice what these various tools are doing to it. And it's just, it became
very clear to me that it was an unrewarding use of my attention. Now, it's not to say there isn't
some digital platform that's conceivable that would be useful and rewarding, but
yeah, I mean, we just have, you know, our life is doled out to us in moments. And we have,
and we're continually solving this riddle of what is going to suffice to make this moment engaging
and meaningful and aligned with who I want to be now and how I want the future to look,
that we have this tension between being in the present and becoming in the future.
It's a seeming paradox. Again, it's not really a paradox, but I do think the ground truth
for personal well-being is to find a mode of being where you can pay attention
to the present moment, and this is meditation by another name.
You can pay attention to the present moment with sufficient gravity that you recognize that
just consciousness itself in the present moment, no matter what's happening,
is already a circumstance of freedom and contentment and tranquility. You can be happy now
before anything happens, before this next desire gets gratified, before this next problem gets
solved. There's this kind of ground truth that you're free, that consciousness is free and open
and unencumbered by really any problem until you get lost in thought about all the problems that
may yet be real for you. So the ability to catch and observe consciousness, that in itself is a
source of happiness. Without being lost in thought. And so this happens haphazardly for people who
don't meditate because they'll find something in their life that's so captivating, it's so pleasurable,
it's so thrilling. It can even be scary, but it can be even being scared is captivated. It gets
their attention, whatever it is. Sebastian Younger wrote a great book about people's
experience in war here. Strangely, it can be the best experience anyone's ever had because
everything, it's like only the moment matters. The bullet is whizzing by your head. You're not
thinking about your 401k or that thing that you didn't say last week to the person you shouldn't
have been talking about. You're not thinking about Twitter. It's like you're just fully immersed in
the present moment. Meditation is the only way, I mean, that word can mean many things to many
people, but what I mean by meditation is simply the discovery that there is a way to engage the
present moment directly regardless of what's happening. You don't need to be in a war. You
don't need to be having sex. You don't need to be on drugs. You don't need to be surfing. Nothing,
there doesn't have to be a peak experience. It can be completely ordinary, but you can recognize
that in some basic sense, there's only this and everything else is something you're thinking.
You're thinking about the past. You're thinking about the future. Thoughts themselves have no
substance. It's fundamentally mysterious that any thought ever really commandeers your sense of who
you are and makes you anxious or afraid or angry or whatever it is. The more you discover that,
the half-life of all these negative emotions that blow all of us around
get much, much shorter. The anger that would have kept you angry for hours or days
lasts four seconds because the moment it arises, you recognize it and you can get off. At
minimum, you can decide whether it's useful to stay angry at that moment. Obviously, it usually
isn't. And the illusion of free will is one of those thoughts.
Yeah, it's all just happening. Even the mindful and meditative response to this is just happening.
The moments where you recognize or not recognize it's just happening. This does open up a degree
of freedom for a person, but it's not a freedom that gives any motivation to the notion of free
will. It's just a new way of being in the world.
Is there a difference between intellectually knowing free will as an illusion and really
experiencing it? What's the longest you've been able to experience, the escape, the illusion of
free will? Well, it's always obvious to me when I pay attention. Whenever I'm mindful, the term
of jargon in the Buddhist and increasingly outside the Buddhist context is mindfulness,
but there are different levels of mindfulness and there's different degrees of insight into this.
What I'm calling evidence of lack of free will and lack of the self, two sides of the same coin,
there's a sense of being a subject in the middle of experience to whom all experience refers.
A sense of I, a sense of me. That's almost everybody's starting point when they start
to meditate and that's almost always the place people live most of their lives from.
I do think that gets interrupted in ways that get unrecognized. I think people are
constantly losing the sense of I. They're losing the sense of subject to object distance,
but they're not recognizing it. Meditation is the mode in which you can recognize. You can both
consciously precipitate it. You can look for the self and fail to find it and then recognize its
absence. That's just the flip side of the coin of free will. The feeling of having free will
is what it feels like to feel like a self who's thinking his thoughts and doing his actions
and intending his intentions. The man in the middle of the boat who's rowing,
that's the false starting point. When you find that there's no one in the middle of the boat,
in fact, there's no boat. There's just the river. There's just the flow of experience
and there's no center to it and there's no place from which you would control it.
Again, even when you're doing things, this does not negate the difference between voluntary and
involuntary behavior. It's like I can voluntarily reach for this, but when I'm paying attention,
I'm aware that everything is just happening. The intention to move is just arising. I'm in no
position to know why it didn't arise a moment before or a moment later or 50% stronger or weaker
or so as to be ineffective or to be doubly effective where I lurched for it versus I move
slow. I can never run the counterfactuals. All of this opens the door to an even more
disconcerting picture along the same lines, which subsumes this conversation about free will and
it's the question of whether anything is ever possible. This is a question I haven't thought
a lot about it, but it's been a few years I've been kicking this question around.
What if only the actual is possible? We live with this feeling of possibility. We live with
the sense that I have two daughters. I could have had a third child. What does it mean to say
that I could have had a third child? Do you don't have kids? I don't think so.
Not that I know of. The possibility might be there.
What do we mean when we say you could have had a child or you might have a child in the future?
What's the relationship between possibility and actuality and reality? Is there a reality in which
non-actual things are nonetheless real? We have other categories of non-concrete things. We have
things that don't have spatial temporal dimension, but they none the less exist. There's an abstract
reality to numbers. It's philosophically interesting to think about these things.
In some sense, they're not merely invented by us. They're discovered because they have
structure that we can't impose upon them. They're not fictional characters like Hamlet and Superman
also exist in some sense, but they exist at the level of our own fiction and abstraction. But
it's like there are true and false statements you can make about Hamlet. There are true and
false statements you can make about Superman because our fiction, the fictional worlds we've
created have a certain kind of structure. But again, this is all abstract. It's all
abstractible from any of its concrete instantiations. It's not just in the comic books and just in
the movies. It's in our ongoing ideas about these characters. But natural numbers or
the integers don't function quite that way. They're similar, but they also have a structure
that's purely a matter of discovery. You can't just make up whether numbers are prime. If you
give me two integers of a certain size, let's say you mentioned two enormous integers,
if I were to say, okay, well, between those two integers, they're exactly 11 prime numbers.
That's a very specific claim about which I can be right or wrong, whether or not anyone knows
I'm right or wrong. There's a domain of facts there, but it's an abstract reality
that relates in some way that's philosophically interesting, metaphysically interesting to
what we call real reality, the spatial temporal order, the physics of things. But
possibility, at least in my view, occupies a different space. Again, my thoughts on this
are pretty in co-ed. I think I need to talk to a philosopher of physics and or a physicist about
how this may interact with things like the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.
That's an interesting right, exactly. I wonder if discovers in physics further proof or more
concrete proof that many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics has some validity if that
completely starts to change things. That's just more actuality. If I took that seriously,
that's a case of, and truth is that happens even if the many-worlds interpretation isn't true,
but we just imagine we have a physically infinite universe. The implication of infinity is such
that things will begin to repeat themselves the farther you go in space. If you just head
out in one direction, eventually you're going to meet two people just like us having a conversation
just like this and you're going to meet them an infinite number of times in every infinite variety
of permutations slightly different from this conversation. Infinity is just so big that our
intuitions of probability completely break down, but what I'm suggesting is maybe probability
isn't a thing. Maybe there's only actuality. Maybe there's only what happens and at every
point along the way, our notion of what could have happened or what might have happened
is just that. It's just a thought about what could have happened or might have happened.
There's no, so it's a fundamentally different thing. If you can imagine a thing that doesn't
make it real because that's where that possibility exists in your imagination.
Yeah, and possibility itself is a spooky idea because it too has a structure. If I'm going to say,
you could have had a daughter last year,
so we're saying that's possible but not actual.
That is a claim. There are things that are true and not true about that daughter. It has a kind
of structure. It's like- I feel like there's a lot of fog around the possibility. It feels
like a useful narrative. What does it mean? If we say, I just did that, but it's conceivable
that I wouldn't have done that. It's possible that I just threw this cap, but I might not have done
that. You're taking it very temporally close to the original, like what appears as a decision.
Whenever we're saying something's possible but not actual, this thing just happened,
but it's conceivable. It's possible that it wouldn't have happened or that it would have
happened differently. In what does that possibility consist? Where is that? For that to be real,
for the possibility to be real, what claim are we making about the universe?
Well, isn't that an extension of the idea that free will is an illusion, that all we have is
actuality, that the possibility is an illusion? Yeah, I'm just extending it beyond human action.
This goes to the physics of things. This is just everything. We're always telling ourselves a story
that includes possibility. Possibility is really compelling for some reason.
Because it's- I mean, this could sound just academic, but every backward looking regret
or disappointment and every forward looking worry is completely dependent on this notion
of possibility. Every regret is based on the sense that something else, I could have done
something else. Something else could have happened. Every disposition to worry about the future
is based on the feeling that there's this range of possibilities. It could go either way.
And whether or not there's such a thing as possibility, I'm convinced that worry is almost
never psychologically appropriate. Because the reality is that in any given moment,
either you can do something to solve the problem you're worried about or not. So if you can do
something, just do it. And if you can't, your worrying is just causing you to suffer twice
over. You're going to get the medical procedure next week anyway. How much
time between now and next week do you want to spend worrying about it? The worry doesn't
accomplish anything. How much do physicists think about possibility? Well, they think about it in
terms of probability more often. But probability just describes, and again, this is a place where
I might be out of my depth and need to talk to somebody to debunk this. To do therapy with a
physicist. Yeah. But probability seems just describes a pattern of actuality that we've
observed. There are certain things we observe, and those are the actual things that have happened.
And we have this additional story about probability. We have the frequency with which
things have happened in the past. I can flip a fair coin and I know in the abstract that I have a
belief that in the limit, those tosses should converge on 50% heads and 50% tails. I know I
have a story as to why it's not going to be exactly 50% within any arbitrary timeframe.
But in reality, all we ever have are the observed tosses. And then we have an additional story
that, oh, it came up heads, but it could have come up tails. Why do we think that
about that last toss? And what are we claiming is true about the physics of things
if we say it could have been otherwise? I think we're claiming that probability is true.
That it just allows us to have a nice model about the world, gives us hope about the world.
Yeah. It seems that possibility has to be somewhere to be effective. It's a little bit
like what's happening with the laws. There's something metaphysically interesting about
the laws of nature too, because the laws of nature, so the laws of nature impose their work on the
world. We see their evidence, but they're not reducible to any specific set of instances.
So there's some structure there, but the structure isn't just a matter of the actual things.
We have the actual billiard balls that are banging into each other. All of that actuality can be
explained by what actual things are actually doing. But then we have this notion that in addition to
that, we have the laws of nature that are explaining this act. But how are the laws of
nature an additional thing? In addition, it's just the actual things that actually affect
causally. And if they are an additional thing, how are they effective? If they're not among
the actual things, they're just actually banging around. Possibly it has to be hiding somewhere
for the laws of nature to be possible. For anything to be possible, it has to be.
It has to have. It's a closet somewhere, I'm sure.
Where all the possibility goes. It has to be attached to something.
You don't think many worlds is that. Because many worlds still exist.
Well, because we're in this strand of that multiverse. So still you have just a local
instance of what is actual. And then if it proliferates elsewhere where you can't
be affected by it. You can't really connect with the other.
Many worlds are just a statement of basically everything that can happen happens somewhere.
Maybe that's not an entirely kosher formulation of it, but it seems pretty close. But there's
whatever happens. In fact, relativistically, the Einstein's original notion of a block universe
seems to suggest this. And it's been a while since I've been in a conversation with a physicist
where I've gotten a chance to ask about the standing of this concept in physics currently.
I don't hear it discussed much. But the idea of a block universe is that
space-time exists as a totality. In our sense that we are traveling through space-time,
where there's a real difference between the past and the future, that that's an illusion of just our
weird slice we're taking of this larger object. But on some level, it's like you're reading a
the last page of the novel exists just as much as the first page when you're in the middle of it.
If we're living in anything like that, then there's no such thing as possibility. It would seem
there's just what is actual. So as a matter of our experience moment to moment,
I think it's totally compatible with that being true, that there is only what is actual.
That sounds to the nave ear, that sounds like it would be depressing and disempowering and
confining. But it's anything but it's actually, it's a circumstance of pure discovery. You have
no idea what's going to happen next. You don't know who you're going to be tomorrow. You're only
by tendency, seeming to resemble yourself from yesterday. And there's way more freedom in all
of that than it seems true to many people. And yet the basic insight is that you're not,
the real freedom is the recognition that you're not in control of anything. Everything is just
happening, including your thoughts and intentions and moves. So life is a process of continuous
discovery. You're part of the universe. You are just this, it's the miracle that the universe
is illuminated to itself as itself where you sit. And you're continually discovering
what your life is. And then you have this layer at which you're telling yourself a story
that you already know what your life is. And you know exactly who you should be and what's
what's about to happen or you're struggling to form a confident opinion about all of that.
And yet there is this fundamental mystery to everything, even the most familiar experience.
We're all NPCs in the most marvelous video game. Maybe, although my game, my sense of
gaming is does not run as deep as to know what I'm committing to there. It's a non-playing
character. You're more of a Mario Kart guy. I went back, I was an original video gamer,
but it's been a long time since I was there for Pong. I remember when I saw the first Pong in
a restaurant in, I think it was like Benihana's or something. They had a Pong in a table and
that was an amazing moment. It was an amazing moment when you-
You Sam Harris might live from Pong to the invention and deployment of a super intelligent
system. That happened fast if it happens any time in my lifetime.
From Pong to AGI. What kind of things do you do purely for fun that others might consider a waste
of time? Purely for fun. Because meditation doesn't count because most people say that's not a waste
of time. Is there something like Pong that's a deeply embarrassing thing you would never admit?
I don't think, well, I mean, once or twice a year, I will play a round of golf,
which many people would find embarrassing. They might even find my play embarrassing,
but it's fun. Do you find it embarrassing?
No. I mean, golf just takes way too much time, so I can only squander a certain amount of time on
it. I do love it. It's a lot of fun. You have no control over your actual performance.
You're ever discovering. I do have control over my mediocre performance,
but I don't have enough control to make it really good. But happily, I'm in the perfect spot because
I don't invest enough time in it to care how I play, so I just have fun when I play.
Well, I hope there'll be a day where you play around golf with the former President Donald
Trump, and I would love to be- I would bet on him if we play golf. I'm sure he's a better golfer.
I miss the chaos of human civilization in modern times as we've talked about. What gives you hope
about this world in the coming year, in the coming decade, in the coming hundred years,
maybe a thousand years? What's the source of hope for you?
Well, it comes back to a few of the things we've talked about. I know that most people are good
and are mostly converging on the same core values. It's like we're not surrounded by
psychopaths. The thing that finally convinced me to get off Twitter was
how different life was seeming through the lens of Twitter. I just got the sense that there's
way more psychopaths or effective psychopaths than I realized. Then I thought, okay, this
isn't real. This is either a strange context in which actually decent people are behaving
like psychopaths, or it's a bot army or something that I don't have to take seriously.
If we can get the incentives right, I think there's no reason why we can't
really thrive collectively. There's enough wealth to go around. There's no effective limit
within the limits of what's physically possible, but we're nowhere near the limit
on abundance. Forget about going to Mars on this one rock. We could make this place
incredibly beautiful and stable if we just did enough work to
solve some rather long-standing political problems.
The problem of incentives. To you, the basic characteristics of human nature such that
we'll be okay if the incentives are okay. We'll do pretty good.
I'm worried about the asymmetries that it's easier to break things and to fix them. It's easier to
light a fire than to put it out. I do worry that as technology gets more and more powerful,
it becomes easier for the minority who wants to screw things up to effectively screw things up
for everybody. It's easier. A thousand years ago, it was simply impossible for one person
to derange the lives of millions, much less billions. Now, that's getting to be possible.
On the assumption that we're always going to have a sufficient number of crazy individuals or
malevolent individuals, we have to figure out that asymmetry somehow. There's some
cautious exploration of emergent technology that we need to get our head screwed on straight
about. So gain a function of research. Just how much do we want to democratize
all the relevant technologies there? You really want to give everyone the ability to order
nucleotides in the mail and give them the blueprints for viruses online because you're a
free speech absolutist and you think all PDFs need to be exportable everywhere.
So there are limits to... Many people are confused about my take on free speech because I've come
down on the unpopular side of some of these questions, but it's been... My overriding concern
is that in many cases, I'm worried about the free speech of individual businesses or individual
platforms or individual media people to decide that they don't want to be associated with certain
things. So if you own Twitter, I think you should be able to kick off the
Nazi you don't want to be associated with because it's your platform, you own it.
That's your free speech. That's the side of my free speech concern for Twitter. It's not that
every Nazi has the right to algorithmic speech on Twitter. I think if you own Twitter, you should
whether it's just Elon or in the world where it wasn't Elon, just the people who own Twitter
and the board and the shareholders and the employees, these people should be free to decide
what they want to promote or not. I view them as publishers more than as platforms in the end and
that has other implications. But I do worry about this problem of misinformation and
algorithmically and otherwise supercharged misinformation. I do think we're at a bottleneck
now. I guess it could be the hubris of every present generation to think that their moment is
especially important. But I do think with the emergence of these technologies,
we're some kind of bottleneck where we really have to figure out how to get this right.
And if we do get this right, if we figure out how to not drive ourselves crazy
by giving people access to all possible information and misinformation at all times,
I think, yeah, there's no limit to how happily we could collaborate with billions of creative
fulfilled people. It's just- And trillions of robots. Some of them sex robots,
but that's another topic. Yeah, robots that are running the right algorithm,
whatever that algorithm is. Whatever you need in your life to make you happy.
The first time we talked is one of the huge honors in my life. I've been a fan of yours for a long
time. The few times you were respectful but critical to me means the world. And thank you so
much for helping me and caring enough about the world and for everything you do. But I should
say that the few of us that try to put love in the world on Twitter, miss you on Twitter, but
enjoy yourselves. Don't break anything, kids. Have a good party without me.
Thanks. I'm very happy to do this. Thanks for the invitation. Thank you.
Great to see you again. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Sam Harris. To support
this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you
with some words from Martin Luther King, Jr. Love is the only force capable of transforming
an enemy into a friend. Thank you for listening. I hope to see you next time.